And if thy brother, a Hebrew man, or a Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years; then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee. And when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty: thou shalt furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy winepress: of that wherewith the LORD thy God hath blessed thee thou shalt give unto him. And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt, and the LORD thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command thee this thing today.Besides the crime which consists in violating the law, and varying from the right rule of reason, whereby a man so far becomes degenerate, and declares himself to quit the principles of human nature, and to be a noxious creature, there is commonly injury done to some person or other, and some other man receives damage by his transgression: in which case he who hath received any damage, has, besides the right of punishment common to him with other men, a particular right to seek reparation. john locke,second treatisBy our unpaid labor and suffering, we have earned the right to the soil, many times over and over, and now we are determined to have it Elegant Racism If you sought to advantage one group of Americans and disadvantage another, you could scarcely choose a more graceful method than housing discrimination. Read more It was in these early years that Ross began to understand himself as an Americanhe did not live under the blind decree of justice, but under the heel of a regime that elevated armed robbery to a governing principle. He thought about fighting.Just be quiet,his father told him.Because theyll come and kill us all. Clyde Ross grew. He was drafted into the Army. The draft officials offered him an exemption if he stayed home and worked. He preferred to take his chances with war. He was stationed in California. He found that he could go into stores without being bothered. He could walk the streets without being harassed. He could go into a restaurant and receive service.Ross was shipped off to Guam. He fought in World War II to save the world from tyranny. But when he returned to Clarksdale, he found that tyranny had followed him home. This was eight years before Mississippi lynched Emmett Till and tossed his broken body into the Tallahatchie River. The Great Migration, a mass exodus of  million African Americans that spanned most of the th century, was now in its second wave. The black pilgrims did not journey north simply seeking better wages and work, or bright lights and big adventures. They were fleeing the acquisitive warlords of the South. They were seeking the protection of the law. Clyde Ross was among them. He came to Chicago in  and took a job as a taster at Campbells Soup. He made a stable wage. He married. He had children. His paycheck was his own. No Klansmen stripped him of the vote. When he walked down the street, he did not have to move because a white man was walking past. He did not have to take off his hat or avert his gaze. His journey from peonage to full citizenship seemed near-complete. Only one item was missinga home, that final badge of entry into the sacred order of the American middle class of the Eisenhower yearsI Ross and his wife bought a house in North Lawndale, a bustling community on Chicagos West Side. North Lawndale had long been a predominantly Jewish neighborhood, but a handful of middle-class African Americans had lived there starting in thes. The community was anchored by the sprawling Sears, Roebuck headquarters. North Lawndales Jewish Peoples Institute actively encouraged blacks to move into the neighborhood, seeking to make it apilot community for interracial living. In the battle for integration then being fought around the country, North Lawndale seemed to offer promising terrain. But out in the tall grass, highwaymen, nefarious as any Clarksdale kleptocrat, were lying in wait.From the s through the s, black people across the country were largely cut out of the legitimate home-mortgage market. Three months after Clyde Ross moved into his house, the boiler blew out. This would normally be a homeowners responsibility, but in fact, Ross was not really a homeowner. His payments were made to the seller, not the bank. And Ross had not signed a normal mortgage. Hed boughton contract: a predatory agreement that combined all the responsibilities of homeownership with all the disadvantages of rentingwhile offering the benefits of neither. Ross had bought his house for $,. The seller, not the previous homeowner but a new kind of middleman, had bought it for only $, six months before selling it to Ross. In a contract sale, the seller kept the deed until the contract was paid in fulland, unlike with a normal mortgage, Ross would acquire no equity in the meantime. If he missed a single payment, he would immediately forfeit his $, down payment, all his monthly payments, and the property itself. The men who peddled contracts in North Lawndale would sell homes at inflated prices and then evict families who could not paytaking their down payment and their monthly installments as profit. Then theyd bring in another black family, rinse, and repeat.He loads them up with payments they cant meet,an office secretary told The Chicago Daily News of her boss, the speculator Lou Fushanis, in .Then he takes the property away from them. Hes sold some of the buildings three or four times Ross had tried to get a legitimate mortgage in another neighborhood, but was told by a loan officer that there was no financing available. The truth was that there was no financing for people like Clyde Ross. From the s through the s, black people across the country were largely cut out of the legitimate home-mortgage market through means both legal and extralegal. Chicago whites employed every measure, fromrestrictive covenantsto bombings, to keep their neighborhoods segregated. Their efforts were buttressed by the federal government. I Congress created the Federal Housing Administration. The FHA insured private mortgages, causing a drop in interest rates and a decline in the size of the down payment required to buy a house. But an insured mortgage was not a possibility for Clyde Ross. The FHA had adopted a system of maps that rated neighborhoods according to their perceived stability. On the maps, green areas, ratedA,indicatedin demand neighborhoods that, as one appraiser put it, lackeda single foreigner or Negro.These neighborhoods were considered excellent prospects for insurance. Neighborhoods where black people lived were ratedDand were usually considered ineligible for FHA backing. They were colored in red. Neither the percentage of black people living there nor their social class mattered. Black people were viewed as a contagion. Redlining went beyond FHA-backed loans and spread to the entire mortgage industry, which was already rife with racism, excluding black people from most legitimate means of obtaining a mortgage.A   handicapped by their restricted choice of neighborhood. Black people with upper-middle-class incomes do not generally live in upper-middle-class neighborhoods. Sharkeys research shows that black families making $, typically live in the kinds of neighborhoods inhabited by white families making $,.Blacks and whites inhabit such different neighborhoods,Sharkey writes,that it is not possible to compare the economic outcomes of black and white children.A national real-estate association advised not to sell toa colored man of means who was giving his children a college education.The implications are chilling. As a rule, poor black people do not work their way out of the ghettoand those who do often face the horror of watching their children and grandchildren tumble back.Even seeming evidence of progress withers under harsh light. I the Manhattan Institute cheerily noted that segregation had declined since the s. And yet African Americans still remainedby farthe most segregated ethnic group in the country.With segregation, with the isolation of the injured and the robbed, comes the concentration of disadvantage. An unsegregated America might see poverty, and all its effects, spread across the country with no particular bias toward skin color. Instead, the concentration of poverty has been paired with a concentration of melanin. The resulting conflagration has been devastating.One thread of thinking in the African American community holds that these depressing numbers partially stem from cultural pathologies that can be altered through individual grit and exceptionally good behavior. (I Philadelphia Mayor Michael Nutter, responding to violence among young black males, put the blame on the family:Too many men making too many babies they dont want to take care of, and then we end up dealing with your children.Nutter turned to those presumably fatherless babies:Pull your pants up and buy a belt, because no one wants to see your underwear or the crack of your butt.) The thread is as old as black politics itself. It is also wrong. The kind of trenchant racism to which black people have persistently been subjected can never be defeated by making its victims more respectable. The essence of American racism is disrespect. And in the wake of the grim numbers, we see the grim inheritance.The Contract Buyers Leagues suit brought by Clyde Ross and his allies took direct aim at this inheritance. The suit was rooted in Chicagos long history of segregation, which had created two housing marketsone legitimate and backed by the government, the other lawless and patrolled by predators. The suit dragged on unti when the league lost a jury trial. Securing the equal protection of the law proved hard; securing reparations proved impossible. If there were any doubts about the mood of the jury, the foreman removed them by saying, when asked about the verdict, that he hoped it would help endthe mess Earl Warren made with Brown v. Board of Education and all that nonsense.An unsegregated America might see poverty spread across the country, with no particular bias toward skin color.The Supreme Court seems to share that sentiment. The past two decades have witnessed a rollback of the progressive legislation of the s. Liberals have found themselves on the defensive. I when Barack Obama was a candidate for president, he was asked whether his daughtersMalia and Sashashould benefit from affirmative action. He answered in the negative.They have been taught Christian civilization, and to speak the noble English language instead of some African gibberish. The account is square with the ex-slaves.Not exactly. Having been enslaved for  years, black people were not left to their own devices. They were terrorized. In the Deep South, a second slavery ruled. In the North, legislatures, mayors, civic associations, banks, and citizens all colluded to pin black people into ghettos, where they were overcrowded, overcharged, and undereducated. Businesses discriminated against them, awarding them the worst jobs and the worst wages. Police brutalized them in the streets. And the notion that black lives, black bodies, and black wealth were rightful targets remained deeply rooted in the broader society. Now we have half-stepped away from our long centuries of despoilment, promising,Never again.But still we are haunted. It is as though we have run up a credit-card bill and, having pledged to charge no more, remain befuddled that the balance does not disappear. The effects of that balance, interest accruing daily, are all around us.Broach the topic of reparations today and a barrage of questions inevitably follows: Who will be paid? How much will they be paid? Who will pay? But if the practicalities, not the justice, of reparations are the true sticking point, there has for some time been the beginnings of a solution. For the past  years, Congressman John Conyers Jr., who represents the Detroit area, has marked every session of Congress by introducing a bill calling for a congressional study of slavery and its lingering effects as well as recommendations forappropriate remedies.A country curious about how reparations might actually work has an easy solution in Conyerss bill, now called H the Commission to Study Reparation Proposals for African Americans Act. We would support this bill, submit the question to study, and then assess the possible solutions. But we are not interested.reporters notebookWhat We Should Be Asking About ReparationsAny contemplation of compensated emancipation must grapple with how several counties, and some states in the South, would react to finding themselves suddenly outnumbered by free black people.Read moreIts because its black folks making the claim,Nkechi Taifa, who helped found ncobra, says.People who talk about reparations are considered left lunatics. But all we are talking about is studying [reparations]. As John Conyers has said, we study everything. We study the water, the air. We cant even study the issue? This bill does not authorize one red cent to anyone.That HR  has neverunder either Democrats or Republicansmade it to the House floor suggests our concerns are rooted not in the impracticality of reparations but in something more existential. If we conclude that the conditions in North Lawndale and black America are not inexplicable but are instead precisely what youd expect of a community that for centuries has lived in Americas crosshairs, then what are we to make of the worlds oldest democracy?One cannot escape the question by hand-waving at the past, disavowing the acts of ones ancestors, nor by citing a recent date of ancestral immigration. The last slaveholder has been dead for a very long time. The last soldier to endure Valley Forge has been dead much longer. To proudly claim the veteran and disown the slaveholder is patriotismla carte. A nation outlives its generations. We were not there when Washington crossed the Delaware, but Emanuel Gottlieb Leutzes rendering has meaning to us. We were not there when Woodrow Wilson took us into World War I, but we are still paying out the pensions. If Thomas Jeffersons genius matters, then so does his taking of Sally Hemingss body. If George Washington crossing the Delaware matters, so must his ruthless pursuit of the runagate Oney Judge.Black families making $, typically live in the kinds of neighborhoods inhabited by white families making $,.I President William Howard Taft told the country thatintelligentwhite southerners were ready to see blacks asuseful members of the community.A week later Joseph Gordon, a black man, was lynched outside Greenwood, Mississippi. The high point of the lynching era has passed. But the memories of those robbed of their lives still live on in the lingering effects. Indeed, in America there is a strange and powerful belief that if you stab a black person  times, the bleeding stops and the healing begins the moment the assailant drops the knife. We believe white dominance to be a fact of the inert past, a delinquent debt that can be made to disappear if only we dont look.There has always been another way.It is in vain to alledge, that our ancestors brought them hither, and not we,Yale President Timothy Dwight said in .We inherit our ample patrimony with all its incumbrances; and are bound to pay the debts of our ancestors. This debt, particularly, we are bound to discharge: and, when the righteous Judge of the Universe comes to reckon with his servants, he will rigidly exact the payment at our hands. To give them liberty, and stop here, is to entail upon them a curse.IV.The Ills That Slavery Frees Us FromAmerica begins in black plunder and white democracy, two features that are not contradictory but complementary.The men who came together to found the independent United States, dedicated to freedom and equality, either held slaves or were willing to join hands with those who did,the historian Edmund S. Morgan wrote.None of them felt entirely comfortable about the fact, but neither did they feel responsible for it. Most of them had inherited both their slaves and their attachment to freedom from an earlier generation, and they knew the two were not unconnected.Slaves in South Carolina prepare cotton for the gin in . (Timothy H. Osullivan/Library of Congress)When enslaved Africans, plundered of their bodies, plundered of their families, and plundered of their labor, were brought to the colony of Virginia i they did not initially endure the naked racism that would engulf their progeny. Some of them were freed. Some of them intermarried. Still others escaped with the white indentured servants who had suffered as they had. Some even rebelled together, allying under Nathaniel Bacon to torch Jamestown in .One hundred years later, the idea of slaves and poor whites joining forces would shock the senses, but in the early days of the English colonies, the two groups had much in common. English visitors to Virginia found that its mastersabuse their servantes with intollerable oppression and hard usage.White servants were flogged, tricked into serving beyond their contracts, and traded in much the same manner as slaves.Thishard usageoriginated in a simple fact of the New Worldland was boundless but cheap labor was limited. As life spans increased in the colony, the Virginia planters found in the enslaved Africans an even more efficient source of cheap labor. Whereas indentured servants were still legal subjects of the English crown and thus entitled to certain protections, African slaves entered the colonies as aliens. Exempted from the protections of the crown, they became early Americas indispensable working classfit for maximum exploitation, capable of only minimal resistance.For the next  years, American law worked to reduce black people to a class of untouchables and raise all white men to the level of citizens. I Virginia mandated thatall persons except Negroeswere to carry arms. I Maryland mandated that any Englishwoman who married a slave must live as a slave of her husbands master. I the Virginia assembly passed a law allowing for the dismemberment of unruly slavesbut forbidding masters from whippinga Christian white servant naked, without an order from a justice of the peace.In that same law, the colony mandated thatall horses, cattle, and hogs, now belonging, or that hereafter shall belong to any slavebe seized and sold off by the local church, the profits used to supportthe poor of the said parish.At that time, there would have still been people alive who could remember blacks and whites joining to burn down Jamestown only  years before. But at the beginning of the th century, two primary classes were enshrined in America.The two great divisions of society are not the rich and poor, but white and black,John C. Calhoun, South Carolinas senior senator, declared on the Senate floor in .And all the former, the poor as well as the rich, belong to the upper class, and are respected and treated as equals.I the majority of people living in South Carolina and Mississippi, almost half of those living in Georgia, and about one-third of all Southerners were on the wrong side of Calhouns line. The state with the largest number of enslaved Americans was Virginia, where in certain counties some  percent of all people labored in chains. Nearly one-fourth of all white Southerners owned slaves, and upon their backs the economic basis of Americaand much of the Atlantic worldwas erected. In the seven cotton states, one-third of all white income was derived from slavery. B cotton produced by slave labor constituted  percent of the countrys exports. The web of this slave society extended north to the looms of New England, and across the Atlantic to Great Britain, where it powered a great economic transformation and altered the trajectory of world history.Whoever says Industrial Revolution,wrote the historian Eric J. Hobsbawm,says cotton.In this artistic rendering by Henry Louis Stephens, a well-known illustrator of the era, a family is in the process of being separated at a slave auction. (Library of Congress)The wealth accorded America by slavery was not just in what the slaves pulled from the land but in the slaves themselves.I slaves as an asset were worth more than all of Americas manufacturing, all of the railroads, all of the productive capacity of the United States put together,the Yale historian David W. Blight has noted.Slaves were the single largest, by far, financial asset of property in the entire American economy.The sale of these slavesin whose bodies that money congealed,writes Walter Johnson, a Harvard historiangenerated even more ancillary wealth. Loans were taken out for purchase, to be repaid with interest. Insurance policies were drafted against the untimely death of a slave and the loss of potential profits. Slave sales were taxed and notarized. The vending of the black body and the sundering of the black family became an economy unto themselves, estimated to have brought in tens of millions of dollars to antebellum America. In  there were more millionaires per capita in the Mississippi Valley than anywhere else in the country.Beneath the cold numbers lay lives divided.I had a constant dread that Mrs. Moore, her mistress, would be in want of money and sell my dear wife,a freedman wrote, reflecting on his time in slavery.We constantly dreaded a final separation. Our affection for each was very strong, and this made us always apprehensive of a cruel parting.Forced partings were common in the antebellum South. A slave in some parts of the region stood a  percent chance of being sold in his or her lifetime. Twenty-five percent of interstate trades destroyed a first marriage and half of them destroyed a nuclear family.When the wife and children of Henry Brown, a slave in Richmond, Virginia, were to be sold away, Brown searched for a white master who might buy his wife and children to keep the family together. He failed:The next day, I stationed myself by the side of the road, along which the slaves, amounting to three hundred and fifty, were to pass. The purchaser of my wife was a Methodist minister, who was about starting for North Carolina. Pretty soon five waggon-loads of little children passed, and looking at the foremost one, what should I see but a little child, pointing its tiny hand towards me, exclaiming,Theres my father; I knew he would come and bid me good-bye.It was my eldest child! Soon the gang approached in which my wife was chained. I looked, and beheld her familiar face; but O, reader, that glance of agony! may God spare me ever again enduring the excruciating horror of that moment! She passed, and came near to where I stood. I seized hold of her hand, intending to bid her farewell; but words failed me; the gift of utterance had fled, and I remained speechless. I followed her for some distance, with her hand grasped in mine, as if to save her from her fate, but I could not speak, and I was obliged to turn away in silence.In a time when telecommunications were primitive and blacks lacked freedom of movement, the parting of black families was a kind of murder. Here we find the roots of American wealth and democracyin the for-profit destruction of the most important asset available to any people, the family. The destruction was not incidental to Americas rise; it facilitated that rise. By erecting a slave society, America created the economic foundation for its great experiment in democracy. The labor strife that seeded Bacons rebellion was suppressed. Americas indispensable working class existed as property beyond the realm of politics, leaving white Americans free to trumpet their love of freedom and democratic values. Assessing antebellum democracy in Virginia, a visitor from England observed that the states nativescan profess an unbounded love of liberty and of democracy in consequence of the mass of the people, who in other countries might become mobs, being there nearly altogether composed of their own Negro slaves.V. The Quiet PlunderThe consequences of  years of enslavement, of war upon black families and black people, were profound. Like homeownership today, slave ownership was aspirational, attracting not just those who owned slaves but those who wished to. Much as homeowners today might discuss the addition of a patio or the painting of a living room, slaveholders traded tips on the best methods for breeding workers, exacting labor, and doling out punishment. Just as a homeowner today might subscribe to a magazine like This Old House, slaveholders had journals such as De Bows Review, which recommended the best practices for wringing profits from slaves. By the dawn of the Civil War, the enslavement of black America was thought to be so foundational to the country that those who sought to end it were branded heretics worthy of death. Imagine what would happen if a president today came out in favor of taking all American homes from their owners: the reaction might well be violent.Click the image above to view the full document.This country was formed for the white, not for the black man,John Wilkes Booth wrote, before killing Abraham Lincoln.And looking upon African slavery from the same standpoint held by those noble framers of our Constitution, I for one have ever considered it one of the greatest blessings (both for themselves and us) that God ever bestowed upon a favored nation.In the aftermath of the Civil War, Radical Republicans attempted to reconstruct the country upon something resembling universal equalitybut they were beaten back by a campaign ofRedemption,led by White Liners, Red Shirts, and Klansmen bent on upholding a societyformed for the white, not for the black man.A wave of terrorism roiled the South. In his massive history Reconstruction, Eric Foner recounts incidents of black people being attacked for not removing their hats; for refusing to hand over a whiskey flask; for disobeying church procedures; forusing insolent language; for disputing labor contracts; for refusing to betied like a slave.Sometimes the attacks were intended simply tothin out the nwords a little.Terrorism carried the day. Federal troops withdrew from the South in . The dream of Reconstruction died. For the next century, political violence was visited upon blacks wantonly, with special treatment meted out toward black people of ambition. Black schools and churches were burned to the ground. Black voters and the political candidates who attempted to rally them were intimidated, and some were murdered. At the end of World War I, black veterans returning to their homes were assaulted for daring to wear the American uniform. The demobilization of soldiers after the war, which put white and black veterans into competition for scarce jobs, produced the Red Summer of : a succession of racist pogroms against dozens of cities ranging from Longview, Texas, to Chicago to Washington, D.C. Organized white violence against blacks continued into the sin  a white mob leveled TulsasBlack Wall Street,and in  another one razed the black town of Rosewood, Floridaand virtually no one was punished.A postcard dated Augu depicts the aftermath of a lynching in Center, Texas, near the Louisiana border. According to the text on the other side, the victim was a -year-old boy.The work of mobs was a rabid and violent rendition of prejudices that extended even into the upper reaches of American government. The New Deal is today remembered as a model for what progressive government should docast a broad social safety net that protects the poor and the afflicted while building the middle class. When progressives wish to express their disappointment with Barack Obama, they point to the accomplishments of Franklin Roosevelt. But these progressives rarely note that Roosevelts New Deal, much like the democracy that produced it, rested on the foundation of Jim Crow.The Jim Crow South,writes Ira Katznelson, a history and political-science professor at Columbia,was the one collaborator Americas democracy could not do without.The marks of that collaboration are all over the New Deal. The omnibus programs passed under the Social Security Act in  were crafted in such a way as to protect the southern way of life. Old-age insurance (Social Security proper) and unemployment insurance excluded farmworkers and domesticsjobs heavily occupied by blacks. When President Roosevelt signed Social Security into law i  percent of African Americans nationally and between  and  percent in the South were ineligible. The NAACP protested, calling the new American safety neta sieve with holes just big enough for the majority of Negroes to fall through.The oft-celebrated G.I. Bill similarly failed black Americans, by mirroring the broader countrys insistence on a racist housing policy. Though ostensibly color-blind, Title III of the bill, which aimed to give veterans access to low-interest home loans, left black veterans to tangle with white officials at their local Veterans Administration as well as with the same banks that had, for years, refused to grant mortgages to blacks. The historian Kathleen J. Frydl observes in her  book, The GI Bill, that so many blacks were disqualified from receiving Title III benefitsthat it is more accurate simply to say that blacks could not use this particular title.In Cold War America, homeownership was seen as a means of instilling patriotism, and as a civilizing and anti-radical force.No man who owns his own house and lot can be a Communist,claimed William Levitt, who pioneered the modern suburb with the development of the various Levittowns, his famous planned communities.He has too much to do.But the Levittowns were, with Levitts willing acquiescence, segregated throughout their early years. Daisy and Bill Myers, the first black family to move into Levittown, Pennsylvania, were greeted with protests and a burning cross. A neighbor who opposed the family said that Bill Myers wasprobably a nice guy, but every time I look at him I see $, drop off the value of my house.The neighbor had good reason to be afraid. Bill and Daisy Myers were from the other side of John C. Calhouns dual society. If they moved next door, housing policy almost guaranteed that their neighborsproperty values would decline.In Augus state police pull teenagers out of a car during a demonstration against Bill and Daisy Myers, the first African Americans to move into Levittown, Pennsyvlania. (AP Photo/Bill Ingraham)Whereas shortly before the New Deal, a typical mortgage required a large down payment and full repayment within about  years, the creation of the Home OwnersLoan Corporation in  and then the Federal Housing Administration the following year allowed banks to offer loans requiring no more than  percent down, amortized over  to  years.Without federal intervention in the housing market, massive suburbanization would have been impossible,writes Thomas J. Sugrue, a historian at the University of Pennsylvania.I only  percent of Americans owned their own homes; b more than  percent were home owners. Home ownership became an emblem of American citizenship.That emblem was not to be awarded to blacks. The American real-estate industry believed segregation to be a moral principle. As late a the National Association of Real Estate Boardscode of ethics warned thata Realtor should never be instrumental in introducing into a neighborhoodany race or nationality, or any individuals whose presence will clearly be detrimental to property values.A  brochure specified that such potential undesirables might include madams, bootleggers, gangstersanda colored man of means who was giving his children a college education and thought they were entitled to live among whites.The federal government concurred. It was the Home OwnersLoan Corporation, not a private trade association, that pioneered the practice of redlining, selectively granting loans and insisting that any property it insured be covered by a restrictive covenanta clause in the deed forbidding the sale of the property to anyone other than whites. Millions of dollars flowed from tax coffers into segregated white neighborhoods.One man said his black neighbor wasprobably a nice guy, but every time I look at him I see $, drop off the value of my house.For perhaps the first time, the federal government embraced the discriminatory attitudes of the marketplace,the historian Kenneth T. Jackson wrote in his  book, Crabgrass Frontier, a history of suburbanization.Previously, prejudices were personalized and individualized; FHA exhorted segregation and enshrined it as public policy. Whole areas of cities were declared ineligible for loan guarantees.Redlining was not officially outlawed unti by the Fair Housing Act. By then the damage was doneand reports of redlining by banks have continued.The federal government is premised on equal fealty from all its citizens, who in return are to receive equal treatment. But as late as the mid-th century, this bargain was not granted to black people, who repeatedly paid a higher price for citizenship and received less in return. Plunder had been the essential feature of slavery, of the society described by Calhoun. But practically a full century after the end of the Civil War and the abolition of slavery, the plunderquiet, systemic, submergedcontinued even amidst the aims and achievements of New Deal liberals.VI. Making The Second GhettoToday chicago is one of the most segregated cities in the country, a fact that reflects assiduous planning. In the effort to uphold white supremacy at every level down to the neighborhood, Chicagoa city founded by the black fur trader Jean Baptiste Point du Sablehas long been a pioneer. The efforts began in earnest i when the Chicago Real Estate Board, horrified by the influx of southern blacks, lobbied to zone the entire city by race. But after the Supreme Court ruled against explicit racial zoning that year, the city was forced to pursue its agenda by more-discreet means.Like the Home OwnersLoan Corporation, the Federal Housing Administration initially insisted on restrictive covenants, which helped bar blacks and other ethnic undesirables from receiving federally backed home loans. By the s, Chicago led the nation in the use of these restrictive covenants, and about half of all residential neighborhoods in the city were effectively off-limits to blacks.It is common today to become misty-eyed about the old black ghetto, where doctors and lawyers lived next door to meatpackers and steelworkers, who themselves lived next door to prostitutes and the unemployed. This segregationist nostalgia ignores the actual conditions endured by the people living therevermin and arson, for instanceand ignores the fact that the old ghetto was premised on denying black people privileges enjoyed by white Americans.I when the Supreme Court ruled that restrictive covenants, while permissible, were not enforceable by judicial action, Chicago had other weapons at the ready. The Illinois state legislature had already given Chicagos city council the right to approveand thus to vetoany public housing in the citys wards. This came in handy i when a new federal housing act sent millions of tax dollars into Chicago and other cities around the country. Beginning i site selection for public housing proceeded entirely on the grounds of segregation. By the s, the city had created with its vast housing projects what the historian Arnold R. Hirsch calls asecond ghetto,one larger than the old Black Belt but just as impermeable. More than  percent of all the family public-housing units built in Chicago between  and the mid-s were built in all-black neighborhoods.Governmental embrace of segregation was driven by the virulent racism of Chicagos white citizens. White neighborhoods vulnerable to black encroachment formed block associations for the sole purpose of enforcing segregation. They lobbied fellow whites not to sell. They lobbied those blacks who did manage to buy to sell back. I a group of Englewood Catholics formed block associations intended tokeep up the neighborhood.Translation: keep black people out. And when civic engagement was not enough, when government failed, when private banks could no longer hold the line, Chicago turned to an old tool in the American repertoireracial violence.The pattern of terrorism is easily discernible,concluded a Chicago civic group in the s.It is at the seams of the black ghetto in all directions.On July  and  o a mob of thousands assembled in Chicagos Park Manor neighborhood, hoping to eject a black doctor whod recently moved in. The mob pelted the house with rocks and set the garage on fire. The doctor moved away.I after a few black veterans moved into the Fernwood section of Chicago, three nights of rioting broke out; gangs of whites yanked blacks off streetcars and beat them. Two years later, when a union meeting attended by blacks in Englewood triggered rumors that a home was beingsold to nwords,blacks (and whites thought to be sympathetic to them) were beaten in the streets. I thousands of whites in Cicero,  minutes or so west of downtown Chicago, attacked an apartment building that housed a single black family, throwing bricks and firebombs through the windows and setting the apartment on fire. A Cook County grand jury declined to charge the riotersand instead indicted the familys NAACP attorney, the apartments white owner, and the owners attorney and rental agent, charging them with conspiring to lower property values. Two years after that, whites picketed and planted explosives in South Deering, about  minutes from downtown Chicago, to force blacks out.The September  Cicero protest against housing discrimination was one of the first nonviolent civil-rights campaigns launched near a major city. (Associated Press)When terrorism ultimately failed, white homeowners simply fled the neighborhood. The traditional terminology, white flight, implies a kind of natural expression of preference. In fact, white flight was a triumph of social engineering, orchestrated by the shared racist presumptions of Americas public and private sectors. For should any nonracist white families decide that integration might not be so bad as a matter of principle or practicality, they still had to contend with the hard facts of American housing policy: When the mid-th-century white homeowner claimed that the presence of a Bill and Daisy Myers decreased his property value, he was not merely engaging in racist dogmahe was accurately observing the impact of federal policy on market prices. Redlining destroyed the possibility of investment wherever black people lived.VII.A Lot Of People Fell By The WaySpeculators in north lawndale, and at the edge of the black ghettos, knew there was money to be made off white panic. They resorted toblock-bustingspooking whites into selling cheap before the neighborhood became black. They would hire a black woman to walk up and down the street with a stroller. Or theyd hire someone to call a number in the neighborhood looking forJohnny Mae.Then theyd cajole whites into selling at low prices, informing them that the more blacks who moved in, the more the value of their homes would decline, so better to sell now. With these white-fled homes in hand, speculators then turned to the masses of black people who had streamed northward as part of the Great Migration, or who were desperate to escape the ghettos: the speculators would take the houses theyd just bought cheap through block-busting and sell them to blacks on contract.To keep up with his payments and keep his heat on, Clyde Ross took a second job at the post office and then a third job delivering pizza. His wife took a job working at Marshall Field. He had to take some of his children out of private school. He was not able to be at home to supervise his children or help them with their homework. Money and time that Ross wanted to give his children went instead to enrich white speculators.The problem was the money,Ross told me.Without the money, you cant move. You cant educate your kids. You cant give them the right kind of food. Cant make the house look good. They think this neighborhood is where they supposed to be. It changes their outlook. My kids were going to the best schools in this neighborhood, and I couldnt keep them in there.Mattie Lewis came to Chicago from her native Alabama in the mid-s, when she wa persuaded by a friend who told her she could get a job as a hairdresser. Instead she was hired by Western Electric, where she worked for  years. I met Lewis in the home of her neighbor Ethel Weatherspoon. Both had owned homes in North Lawndale for more than  years. Both had bought their houses on contract. Both had been active with Clyde Ross in the Contract Buyers Leagues effort to garner restitution from contract sellers whod operated in North Lawndale, banks whod backed the scheme, and even the Federal Housing Administration. We were joined by Jack Macnamara, whod been an organizing force in the Contract Buyers League when it was founded, in . Our gathering had the feel of a reunion, because the writer James Alan McPherson had profiled the Contract Buyers League for The Atlantic back in .Click the image above to download a PDF version of The Atlantics April  profile of the Contract Buyers League.Weatherspoon bought her home in .Most of the whites started moving out,she told me.The blacks are coming. The blacks are coming.They actually said that. They had signs up: dont sell to blacks.Before moving to North Lawndale, Lewis and her husband tried moving to Cicero after seeing a house advertised for sale there.Sorry, I just sold it today,the Realtor told Lewiss husband.I told him,You know they dont want you in Cicero,?Lewis recalls.?They aint going to let nobody black in Cicero.?I the couple bought a home in North Lawndale on contract. They were not blind to the unfairness. But Lewis, born in the teeth of Jim Crow, considered American piracyblack people keep on making it, white people keep on taking ita fact of nature.All I wanted was a house. And that was the only way I could get it. They werent giving black people loans at that time,she said.We thought,This is the way it is. We going to do it till we die, and they aint never going to accept us. Thats just the way it is.The only way you were going to buy a home was to do it the way they wanted,she continued.And I was determined to get me a house. If everybody else can have one, I want one too. I had worked for white people in the South. And I saw how these white people were living in the North and I thought,One day Im going to live just like them.I wanted cabinets and all these things these other people have.White flight was not an accidentit was a triumph of racist social engineering.Whenever she visited white co-workers at their homes, she saw the difference.I could see we were just getting ripped off,she said.I would see things and I would say,Id like to do this at my house.And they would say,Do it,but I would think,I cant, because it costs us so much more.?I asked Lewis and Weatherspoon how they kept up on payments.You paid it and kept working,Lewis said of the contract.When that payment came up, you knew you had to pay it.You cut down on the light bill. Cut down on your food bill,Weatherspoon interjected.Ethel Weatherspoon at her home in North Lawndale. After she bought it i she says,most of the whites started moving out.(Carlos Javier Ortiz)You cut down on things for your child, that was the main thing,said Lewis.My oldest wanted to be an artist and my other wanted to be a dancer and my other wanted to take music.Lewis and Weatherspoon, like Ross, were able to keep their homes. The suit did not win them any remuneration. But it forced contract sellers to the table, where they allowed some members of the Contract Buyers League to move into regular mortgages or simply take over their houses outright. By then theyd been bilked for thousands. In talking with Lewis and Weatherspoon, I was seeing only part of the picturethe tiny minority whod managed to hold on to their homes. But for all our exceptional ones, for every Barack and Michelle Obama, for every Ethel Weatherspoon or Clyde Ross, for every black survivor, there are so many thousands gone.Deputy sheriffs patrol a Chicago street in  after a dozen Contract Buyers League families were evicted. (Courtesy of Sun-Times Media)A lot of people fell by the way,Lewis told me.One woman asked me if I would keep all her china. She said,They aint going to set you out.?VIII.Negro Poverty is not White PovertyOn a recent spring afternoon in North Lawndale, I visited Billy Lamar Brooks Sr. Brooks has been an activist since his youth in the Black Panther Party, when he aided the Contract Buyers League. I met him in his office at the Better Boys Foundation, a staple of North Lawndale whose mission is to direct local kids off the streets and into jobs and college. Brookss work is personal. On Ju his -year-old son, Billy Jr., was shot and killed.These guys tried to stick him up,Brooks told m? If so, it only tangentially relates to the specific problems of black people.Liberals today mostly view racism not as an active, distinct evil but as a relative of white poverty and inequality. They ignore the long tradition of this country actively punishing black successand the elevation of that punishment, in the mid-th century, to federal policy. President Lyndon Johnson may have noted in his historic civil-rights speech at Howard University in  thatNegro poverty is not white poverty.But his advisers and their successors were, and still are, loath to craft any policy that recognizes the difference.After his speech, Johnson convened a group of civil-rights leaders, including the esteemed A. Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin, to address theancient brutality.In a strategy paper, they agreed with the president thatNegro poverty is a special, and particularly destructive, form of American poverty.But when it came to specifically addressing theparticularly destructive,Rustins group demurred, preferring to advance programs that addressedall the poor, black and white.reporters notebookWhite Racism vs. White ResentmentThe idea that Affirmative Action justifies white resentment may be the greatest argument made for reparationslike ever.Read moreThe urge to use the moral force of the black struggle to address broader inequalities originates in both compassion and pragmatism. But it makes for ambiguous policy. Affirmative actions precise aims, for instance, have always proved elusive. Is it meant to make amends for the crimes heaped upon black people? Not according to the Supreme Court. In its  ruling in Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, the Court rejectedsocietal discriminationasan amorphous concept of injury that may be ageless in its reach into the past.Is affirmative action meant to increasediversity? If so, it only tangentially relates to the specific problems of black peoplethe problem of what America has taken from them over several centuries.This confusion about affirmative actions aims, along with our inability to face up to the particular history of white-imposed black disadvantage, dates back to the policys origins.There is no fixed and firm definition of affirmative action,an appointee in Johnsons Department of Labor declared.Affirmative action is anything that you have to do to get results. But this does not necessarily include preferential treatment.Yet America was built on the preferential treatment of white people years of it. Vaguely endorsing a cuddly, feel-good diversity does very little to redress this.Today, progressives are loath to invoke white supremacy as an explanation for anything. On a practical level, the hesitation comes from the dim view the Supreme Court has taken of the reforms of the s. The Voting Rights Act has been gutted. The Fair Housing Act might well be next. Affirmative action is on its last legs. In substituting a broad class struggle for an anti-racist struggle, progressives hope to assemble a coalition by changing the subject.The politics of racial evasion are seductive. But the record is mixed. Aid to Families With Dependent Children was originally written largely to exclude blacksyet by the s it was perceived as a giveaway to blacks. The Affordable Care Act makes no mention of race, but this did not keep Rush Limbaugh from denouncing it as reparations. Moreover, the acts expansion of Medicaid was effectively made optional, meaning that many poor blacks in the former Confederate states do not benefit from it. The Affordable Care Act, like Social Security, will eventually expand its reach to those left out; in the meantime, black people will be injured.Billy Brooks, who assisted the Contract Buyers League, still works in the neighborhood, helping kids escape poverty and violence. (Carlos Javier Ortiz)All that it would take to sink a new WPA program would be some skillfully packaged footage of black men leaning on shovels smoking cigarettes,the sociologist Douglas S. Massey writes.Papering over the issue of race makes for bad social theory, bad research, and bad public policy.To ignore the fact that one of the oldest republics in the world was erected on a foundation of white supremacy, to pretend that the problems of a dual society are the same as the problems of unregulated capitalism, is to cover the sin of national plunder with the sin of national lying. The lie ignores the fact that reducing American poverty and ending white supremacy are not the same. The lie ignores the fact that closing theachievement gapwill do nothing to close theinjury gap,in which black college graduates still suffer higher unemployment rates than white college graduates, and black job applicants without criminal records enjoy roughly the same chance of getting hired as white applicants with criminal records.Chicago, like the country at large, embraced policies that placed black Americas most energetic, ambitious, and thrifty countrymen beyond the pale of society and marked them as rightful targets for legal theft. The effects reverberate beyond the families who were robbed to the community that beholds the spectacle. Dont just picture Clyde Ross working three jobs so he could hold on to his home. Think of his North Lawndale neighborstheir children, their nephews and niecesand consider how watching this affects them. Imagine yourself as a young black child watching your elders play by all the rules only to have their possessions tossed out in the street and to have their most sacred possessiontheir hometaken from them.The message the young black boy receives from his country, Billy Brooks says, is?You aint shit. You not no good. The only thing you are worth is working for us. You will never own anything. You not going to get an education. We are sending your ass to the penitentiary.Theyre telling you no matter how hard you struggle, no matter what you put down, you aint shit.Were going to take what you got. You will never own anything, nword.?Built at the turn of the century, Parchman was supposed to be a progressive and reformist response to the problem ofNegro crime.In fact it was the gulag of Mississippi, an object of terror to African Americans in the Delta. In the early years of the th century, Mississippi Governor James K. Vardaman used to amuse himself by releasing black convicts into the surrounding wilderness and hunting them down with bloodhounds.Throughout the American South,writes David M. Oshinsky in his book Worse Than Slaverysuch a discussionand that is perhaps what scares us. The idea of reparations is frightening not simply because we might lack the ability to pay. The idea of reparations threatens something much deeperAmericas heritage, history, and standing in the world.The early american economy was built on slave labor. The Capitol and the White House were built by slaves. President James K. Polk traded slaves from the Oval Office. The laments aboutblack pathology,the criticism of black family structures by pundits and intellectuals, ring hollow in a country whose existence was predicated on the torture of black fathers, on the rape of black mothers, on the sale of black children. An honest assessment of Americas relationship to the black family reveals the country to be not its nurturer but its destroyer.And this destruction did not end with slavery. Discriminatory laws joined the equal burden of citizenship to unequal distribution of its bounty. These laws reached their apex in the mid-th century, when the federal governmentthrough housing policiesengineered the wealth gap, which remains with us to this day. When we think of white supremacy, we picture colored only signs, but we should picture pirate flags.On some level, we have always grasped this.Negro poverty is not white poverty,President Johnson said in his historic civil-rights speech.Many of its causes and many of its cures are the same. But there are differencesdeep, corrosive, obstinate differencesradiating painful roots into the community and into the family, and the nature of the individual. These differences are not racial differences. They are solely and simply the consequence of ancient brutality, past injustice, and present prejudice.We invoke the words of Jefferson and Lincoln because they say something about our legacy and our traditions. We do this because we recognize our links to the pastat least when they flatter us. But black history does not flatter American democracy; it chastens it. The popular mocking of reparations as a harebrained scheme authored by wild-eyed lefties and intellectually unserious black nationalists is fear masquerading as laughter. Black nationalists have always perceived something unmentionable about America that integrationists dare not acknowledgethat white supremacy is not merely the work of hotheaded demagogues, or a matter of false consciousness, but a force so fundamental to America that it is difficult to imagine the country without it.And so we must imagine a new country. Reparationsby which I mean the full acceptance of our collective biography and its consequencesis the price we must pay to see ourselves squarely. The recovering alcoholic may well have to live with his illness for the rest of his life. But at least he is not living a drunken lie. Reparations beckons us to reject the intoxication of hubris and see America as it isthe work of fallible humans.Wont reparations divide us? Not any more than we are already divided. The wealth gap merely puts a number on something we feel but cannot saythat American prosperity was ill-gotten and selective in its distribution. What is needed is an airing of family secrets, a settling with old ghosts. What is needed is a healing of the American psyche and the banishment of white guilt.What Im talking about is more than recompense for past injusticesmore than a handout, a payoff, hush money, or a reluctant bribe. What Im talking about is a national reckoning that would lead to spiritual renewal. Reparations would mean the end of scarfing hot dogs on the Fourth of July while denying the facts of our heritage. Reparations would mean the end of yellingpatriotismwhile waving a Confederate flag. Reparations would mean a revolution of the American consciousness, a reconciling of our self-image as the great democratizer with the facts of our history.X.There Will Be NoReparationsFrom GermanyWe are not the first to be summoned to such a challenge.I when West Germany began the process of making amends for the Holocaust, it did so under conditions that should be instructive to us. Resistance was violent. Very few Germans believed that Jews were entitled to anything. Only  percent of West Germans surveyed reported feeling guilty about the Holocaust, and only  percent believed that Jews were owed restitution from the German people.reporters notebookThe Auschwitz All Around UsIts very hard to accept white supremacy as a structure erected by actual people, as a choice, as an interest, as opposed to a momentary bout of insanity.Read moreThe rest,the historian Tony Judt wrote in his  book, Postwar,were divided between those (some two-fifths of respondents) who thought that only peoplewho really committed somethingwere responsible and should pay, and those ( percent) who thoughtthat the Jews themselves were partly responsible for what happened to them during the Third Reich.?Germanys unwillingness to squarely face its history went beyond polls. Movies that suggested a societal responsibility for the Holocaust beyond Hitler were banned.The German soldier fought bravely and honorably for his homeland,claimed President Eisenhower, endorsing the Teutonic national myth. Judt wrote,Throughout the fifties West German officialdom encouraged a comfortable view of the German past in which the Wehrmacht was heroic, while Nazis were in a minority and properly punished.Konrad Adenauer, the postwar German chancellor, was in favor of reparations, but his own party was divided, and he was able to get an agreement passed only with the votes of the Social Democratic opposition.If I could take German property without sitting down with them for even a minute but go in with jeeps and machine guns,said David Ben-Gurion,I would do that.Among the Jews of Israel, reparations provoked violent and venomous reactions ranging from denunciation to assassination plots. On Janua as the Knessetthe Israeli parliamentconvened to discuss the prospect of a reparations agreement with West Germany, Menachem Begin, the future prime minister of Israel, stood in front of a large crowd, inveighing against the country that had plundered the lives, labor, and property of his people. Begin claimed that all Germans were Nazis and guilty of murder. His condemnations then spread to his own young state. He urged the crowd to stop paying taxes and claimed that the nascent Israeli nation characterized the fight over whether or not to accept reparations as awar to the death.When alerted that the police watching the gathering were carrying tear gas, allegedly of German manufacture, Begin yelled,The same gases that asphyxiated our parents!Begin then led the crowd in an oath to never forget the victims of the Shoah, lestmy right hand lose its cunningandmy tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth.He took the crowd through the streets toward the Knesset. From the rooftops, police repelled the crowd with tear gas and smoke bombs. But the wind shifted, and the gas blew back toward the Knesset, billowing through windows shattered by rocks. In the chaos, Begin and Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion exchanged insults. Two hundred civilians and  police officers were wounded. Nearly  people were arrested. Knesset business was halted.Begin then addressed the chamber with a fiery speech condemning the actions the legislature was about to take.Today you arrested hundreds,he said.Tomorrow you may arrest thousands. No matter, they will go, they will sit in prison. We will sit there with them. If necessary, we will be killed with them. But there will be noreparationsfrom Germany.Nahum Goldman, the president of the Jewish Claims Commission (center), signs  reparations agreements between Germany and Israel. The two delegations entered the room by different doors, and the ceremony was carried out in silence. (Associated Press)Survivors of the Holocaust feared laundering the reputation of Germany with money, and mortgaging the memory of their dead. Beyond that, there was a taste for revenge.My soul would be at rest if I knew there would be  million German dead to match the  million Jews,said Meir Dworzecki, whod survived the concentration camps of Estonia.Ben-Gurion countered this sentiment, not by repudiating vengeance but with cold calculation:If I could take German property without sitting down with them for even a minute but go in with jeeps and machine guns to the warehouses and take it, I would do thatif, for instance, we had the ability to send a hundred divisions and tell them,Take it.But we cant do that.The reparations conversation set off a wave of bomb attempts by Israeli militants. One was aimed at the foreign ministry in Tel Aviv. Another was aimed at Chancellor Adenauer himself. And one was aimed at the port of Haifa, where the goods bought with reparations money were arriving. West Germany ultimately agreed to pay Israel . billion deutsche marks, or more than $ billion in todays dollars. Individual reparations claims followedfor psychological trauma, for offense to Jewish honor, for halting law careers, for life insurance, for time spent in concentration camps. Seventeen percent of funds went toward purchasing ships.By the end o these reparations vessels constituted two-thirds of the Israeli merchant fleet,writes the Israeli historian Tom Segev in his book The Seventh Million.From  t the reparations money funded about a third of the total investment in Israels electrical system, which tripled its capacity, and nearly half the total investment in the railways.Israels GNP tripled during the  years of the agreement. The Bank of Israel attributed  percent of this growth, along wit jobs, to investments made with reparations money. But Segev argues that the impact went far beyond that. Reparationshad indisputable psychological and political importance,he writes.Reparations could not make up for the murder perpetrated by the Nazis. But they did launch Germanys reckoning with itself, and perhaps provided a road map for how a great civilization might make itself worthy of the name.Assessing the reparations agreement, David Ben-Gurion saidFor the first time in the history of relations between people, a precedent has been created by which a great State, as a result of moral pressure alone, takes it upon itself to pay compensation to the victims of the government that preceded it. For the first time in the history of a people that has been persecuted, oppressed, plundered and despoiled for hundreds of years in the countries of Europe, a persecutor and despoiler has been obliged to return part of his spoils and has even undertaken to make collective reparation as partial compensation for material losses.Something more than moral pressure calls America to reparations. We cannot escape our history. All of our solutions to the great problems of health care, education, housing, and economic inequality are troubled by what must go unspoken.The reason black people are so far behind now is not because of now,Clyde Ross told me.Its because of then.In the early s, Charles Ogletree went to Tulsa, Oklahoma, to meet with the survivors of the  race riot that had devastatedBlack Wall Street.The past was not the past to them.It was amazing seeing these black women and men who were crippled, blind, in wheelchairs,Ogletree told me.I had no idea who they were and why they wanted to see me. They said,We want you to represent us in this lawsuit.?
