AN IRONIC DREAM OF A COMMON LANGUAGE FOR WOMEN IN THE INTEGRATED CIRCUITThis chapter is an effort to build an ironic political myth faithful to feminism, socialism, andmaterialism. Perhaps more faithful as blasphemy is faithful, than as reverent worship andidentification. Blasphemy has always seemed to require taking things very seriously. I know nobetter stance to adopt from within the secular-religious, evangelical traditions of United Statespolitics, including the politics of socialist feminism. Blasphemy protects one from the moralmajority within, while still insisting on the need for community. Blasphemy is not apostasy.Irony is about contradictions that do not resolve into larger wholes, even dialectically, about thetension of holding incompatible things together because both or all are necessary and true.Irony is about humour and serious play. It is also a rhetorical strategy and a political method,one I would like to see more honoured within socialist-feminism. At the centre of my ironicfaith, my blasphemy, is the image of the cyborg.A cyborg is a cybernetic organism, a hybrid of machine and organism, a creature of socialreality as well as a creature of fiction. Social reality is lived social relations, our most importantpolitical construction, a world-changing fiction. The international women's movements haveconstructed 'women's experience', as well as uncovered or discovered this crucial collectiveobject. This experience is a fiction and fact of the most crucial, political kind. Liberation rests onthe construction of the consciousness, the imaginative apprehension, of oppression, and so ofpossibility. The cyborg is a matter of fiction and lived experience that changes what counts aswomen's experience in the late twentieth century. This is a struggle over life and death, but theboundary between science fiction and social reality is an optical illusion.Contemporary science fiction is full of cyborgs - creatures simultaneously animal and machine,who populate worlds ambiguously natural and crafted.Modern medicine is also full of cyborgs, of couplings between organism and machine, eachconceived as coded devices, in an intimacy and with a power that was not generated in thehistory of sexuality. Cyborg 'sex' restores some of the lovely replicative baroque of ferns andinvertebrates (such nice organic prophylactics against heterosexism). Cyborg replication isuncoupled from organic reproduction. Modern production seems like a dream of cyborgcolonization work, a dream that makes the nightmare of Taylorism seem idyllic. And modernwar is a cyborg orgy, coded by C3I, command-control-communication-intelligence, an $84billion item in 1984'sUS defence budget. I am making an argument for the cyborg as a fictionmapping our social and bodily reality and as an imaginative resource suggesting some veryfruitful couplings. Michael Foucault's biopolitics is a flaccid premonition of cyborg politics, a veryopen field.By the late twentieth century, our time, a mythic time, we are all chimeras, theorized andfabricated hybrids of machine and organism; in short, we are cyborgs. Ths cyborg is ourontology; it gives us our politics. The cyborg is a condensed image of both imagination andmaterial reality, the two joined centres structuring any possibility of historical transformation. Inthe traditions of 'Western' science and politics--the tradition of racist, male-dominant capitalism;the tradition of progress; the tradition of the appropriation of nature as resource for theproductions of culture; the tradition of reproduction of the self from the reflections of the other- the relation between organism and machine has been a border war. The stakes in the borderwar have been the territories of production, reproduction, and imagination. This chapter is anargument for pleasure in the confusion of boundaries and for responsibility in their construction.It is also an effort to contribute to socialist-feminist culture and theory in a postmodernist, nonnaturalist mode and in the utopian tradition of imagining a world without gender, which isperhaps a world without genesis, but maybe also a world without end. The cyborg incarnationis outside salvation history. Nor does it mark time on an oedipal calendar, attempting to healthe terrible cleavages of gender in an oral symbiotic utopia or post-oedipal apocalypse. As ZoeSofoulis argues in her unpublished manuscript on Jacques Lacan, Melanie Klein, and nuclearculture, Lacklein, the most terrible and perhaps the most promising monsters in cyborg worldsare embodied in non-oedipal narratives with a different logic of repression, which we need tounderstand for our survival.The cyborg is a creature in a post-gender world; it has no truck with bisexuality, pre-oedipalsymbiosis, unalienated labour, or other seductions to organic wholeness through a finalappropriation of all the powers of the parts into a higher unity. In a sense, the cyborg has noorigin story in the Western sense - a 'final' irony since the cyborg is also the awful apocalyptictelos of the'West's' escalating dominations of abstract individuation, an ultimate self untied at last from alldependency, a man in space. An origin story in the 'Western', humanist sense depends on themyth of original unity, fullness, bliss and terror, represented by the phallic mother from whomall humans must separate, the task of individual development and of history, the twin potentmyths inscribed most powerfully for us in psychoanalysis and Marxism. Hilary Klein has arguedthat both Marxism and psychoanalysis, in their concepts of labour and of individuation andgender formation, depend on the plot of original unity out of which difference must beproduced and enlisted in a drama of escalating domination of woman/nature. The cyborg skipsthe step of original unity, of identification with nature in the Western sense. This is itsillegitimate promise that might lead to subversion of its teleology as star wars.The cyborg is resolutely committed to partiality, irony, intimacy, and perversity. It isoppositional, utopian, and completely without innocence. No longer structured by the polarity ofpublic and private, the cyborg defines a technological polls based partly on a revolution of socialrelations in the oikos, the household. Nature and culture are reworked; the one can no longerbe the resource for appropriation or incorporation by the other. The rela-tionships for formingwholes from parts, including those of polarity and hierarchical domination, are at issue in thecyborg world. Unlike the hopes of Frankenstein's monster, the cyborg does not expect its fatherto save it through a restoration of the garden; that is, through the fabrication of a heterosexualmate, through its completion in a finished whole, a city and cosmos. The eyborg does notdream of community on the model of the organic family, this time without the oedipal project.The cyborg would not recognize the Garden of Eden; it is not made of mud and cannot dreamof returning to dust. Perhaps that is why I want to see if eyborgs can subvert the apocalypse ofreturning to nuclear dust in the manic compulsion to name the Enemy. Cyborgs are notreverent; they do not re-member the cosmos. They are wary of holism, but needy forconnection- they seem to have a natural feel for united front politics, but without the vanguardparty. The main trouble with cyborgs, of course, is that they are the illegitimate offspring ofmilitarism and patriarchal capitalism, not to mention state socialism. But illegitimate offspringare often exceedingly unfaithful to their origins. Their fathers, after all, are inessential.I will return to the science fiction of cyborgs at the end of this chapter, but now I want to signalthree crucial boundary breakdowns that make the following political-fictional (political-scientific)analysis possible. By the late twentieth century in United States scientific culture, the boundarybetween human and animal is thoroughly breached. The last beachheads of uniqueness havebeen polluted if not turned into amusement parks--language tooluse, social behaviour, mental events, nothing really convincingly settles the separation ofhuman and animal. And many people no longer feel the need for such a separation; indeed,many branches of feminist culture affirm the pleasure of connection of human and other livingcreatures. Movements for animal rights are not irrational denials of human uniqueness; they area clear-sighted recognition of connection across the discredited breach of nature and culture.Biology and evolutionary theory over the last two centuries have simultaneously producedmodern organisms as objects of knowledge and reduced the line between humans and animalsto a faint trace re-etched in ideological struggle or professional disputes between life and socialscience. Within this framework, teaching modern Christian creationism should be fought as aform of child abuse.Biological-determinist ideology is only one position opened up in scientific culture for arguingthe meanings of human animality. There is much room for radical political people to contest themeanings of the breached boundary. The cyborg appears in myth precisely where theboundary between human and animal is transgressed. Far from signalling a walling off ofpeople from other living beings, cyborgs signal distrurbingly and pleasurably tight coupling.Bestiality has a new status in this cycle of marriage exchange.The second leaky distinction is between animal-human (organism) and machine. Pre-cyberneticmachines could be haunted; there was always the spectre of the ghost in the machine. Thisdualism structured the dialogue between materialism and idealism that was settled by adialectical progeny, called spirit or history, according to taste. But basically machines were notself-moving, self-designing, autonomous. They could not achieve man's dream, only mock it.They were not man, an author to himself, but only a caricature of that masculinist reproductivedream. To think they were otherwise was paranoid. Now we are not so sure. Late twentiethcentury machines have made thoroughly ambiguous the difference between natural andart)ficial, mind and body, self-developing and externally designed, and many other distinctionsthat used to apply to organisms and machines. Our machines are disturbingly lively, and weourselves frighteningly inert.Technological determination is only one ideological space opened up by the reconceptions ofmachine and organism as coded texts through which we engage in the play of writing andreading the world.3 'Textualization' of everything in poststructuralist, postmodernist theory hasbeen damned by Marxists and socialist feminists for its utopian disregard for the lived relationsof domination that ground the 'play' of arbitrary reading.4 It is certainly true that postmoderniststrategies, like my cyborg myth, subvert myriad organic wholes (for example, the poem, theprimitive culture, the biological organism). In short, the certainty of what counts as nature -- asource of insight and promise of innocence -- is undermined, probably fatally. The transcendentauthorization of interpretation is lost, and with it the ontology grounding 'Western'epistemology. But the alternative is not cynicism or faithlessness, that is, some version ofabstract existence, like the accounts of technological determinism destroying 'man' by the'machine' or 'meaningful political action' by the 'text'. Who cyborgs will be is a radical question;the answers are a matter of survival. Both chimpanzees and artefacts have politics, so whyshouldn't we?The third distinction is a subset of the second: the boundary between physical and non-physicalis very imprecise for us. Pop physics books on the consequences of quantum theory and theindeterminacy principle are a kind of popular scientific equivalent to Harlequin romances* as amarker of radical change in American white heterosexuality: they get it wrong, but they are onthe right subject. Modern machines are quintessentially microelectronic devices: they areeverywhere and they are invisible. Modern machinery is an irreverent upstart god, mocking theFather's ubiquity and spirituality. The silicon chip is a surface for writing; it is etched inmolecular scales disturbed only by atomic noise, the ultimate interference for nuclear scores.Writing, power, and technology are old partners in Western stories of the origin of civilization,but miniaturization has changed our experience of mechanism. Miniaturization has turned out tobe about power; small is not so much beautiful as pre-eminently dangerous, as in cruisemissiles. Contrast the TV sets of the 1950s or the news cameras of the 1970s with the TV wristbands or hand-sized video cameras now advertised. Our best machines are made of sunshine;they are all light and clean because they are nothing but signals, electromagnetic waves, asection of a spectrum, and these machines are eminently portable, mobile -- a matter ofimmense human pain in Detroit and Singapore. People are nowhere near so fluid, being bothmaterial and opaque. Cyborgs are ether, quintessence.The ubiquity and invisibility of cyborgs is precisely why these sunshine-belt machines are sodeadly. They are as hard to see politically as materially. They are about consciousness - or itssimulation.5 They are floating signIfiers moving in pickup trucks across Europe, blocked moreeffectively by the witch-weavings of the displaced and so unnatural Greenham women, whoread the cyborg webs of power so very well, than by the militant labour of older masculinistpolitics, whose natural constituency needs defence jobs. Ultimately the 'hardest' science isabout the realm of greatest boundary confusion, the realm of pure number, pure spirit, C3I,cryptography, and the preservation of potent secrets. The new machines are so clean and light.Their engineers are sun-worshippers mediating a new scientific revolutionassociated with the night dream of post-industrial society. The diseases evoked by these cleanmachines are 'no more' than the minuscule coding changes of an antigen in the immunesystem, 'no more' than the experience of stress. The nimble fingers of 'Oriental' women, the oldfascination of little Anglo-Saxon Victorian girls with doll's houses, women's enforced attention tothe small take on quite new dimensions in this world. There might be a cyborg Alice takingaccount of these new dimensions. Ironically, it might be the unnatural cyborg women makingchips in Asia and spiral dancing in Santa Rita jail* whose constructed unities will guide effectiveoppositional strategies.So my cyborg myth is about transgressed boundaries, potent fusions, and dangerouspossibilities which progressive people might explore as one part of needed political work. One ofmy premises is that most American socialists and feminists see deepened dualisms of mind andbody, animal and machine, idealism and materialism in the social practices, symbolic formulations, and physical artefacts associated with 'high technology' and scientific culture. From OneDimensionalMan (Marcuse, 1964) to The Death of Nature (Merchant, 1980), the analyticresources developed by progressives have insisted on the necessary domination of technics andrecalled us to an imagined organic body to integrate our resistance. Another of my premises isthat the need for unity of people trying to resist world-wide intensification of domination hasnever been more acute. But a slightly perverse shift of perspective might better enable us tocontest for meanings, as well as for other forms of power and pleasure in technologicallymediated societies.From one perspective, a cyborg world is about the final imposition of a grid of control on theplanet, about the final abstraction embodied in a Star Wars apocalypse waged in the name ofdefence, about the final appropriation of women's bodies in a masculinist orgy of warFrom another perspective, a cyborg world might be about lived social and bodily realitiesin which people are not afraid of their joint kinship with animals and machines, not afraid ofpermanently partial identities and contradictory standpoints. The political struggle is to see fromboth perspectives at once because each reveals both dominations and possibilities unimaginablefrom the other vantage point. Single vision produces worse illusions than double vision ormany-headed monsters. Cyborg unities are monstrous and illegitimate; in our present politicalcircumstances, we could hardly hope for more potent myths for resistance and recoupling. I liketo imagine LAG, the Livermore Action Group, as a kind of cyborg society, dedicated torealistically converting the laboratories that most fiercely embody and spew out the tools* A practice at once both spiritual and political that linked guards and arrested anti-nucleardemonstrators in the Alameda County jail in California in the early 1985.Of technological apocalypse, and committed to building a political form that acutally manages tohold together witches, engineers, elders, perverts, Christians, mothers, and Leninists longenough to disarm the state. Fission Impossible is the name of the affinity group in mytown.(Affinity: related not by blood but by choice, the appeal of one chemical nuclear group foranother, avidiy.)6FRACTURED IDENTITIESIt has become difficult to name one's feminism by a single adjective -- or even to insist in everycircumstance upon the noun. Consciousness of exclusion through naming is acute. Identitiesseem contradictory, partial, and strategic. With the hard-won recognition of their social andhistorical constitution, gender, race, and class cannot provide the basis for belief in 'essential'unity. There is nothing about teeing 'female' that naturally binds women. There is not evensuch a state as 'being' female, itself a highly complex category constructed in contested sexualscientific discourses and other social practices. Gender, race, or class consciousness is anachievement forced on us by the terrible historica experience of the contradictory social realitiesof patriarchy, colonialism, and capitalism. And who counts as 'us' in my own rhetoric? Whichidentities are available to ground such a potent political myth called 'us', and what couldmotivate enlistment in this collectivity? Painful fragmentation among feminists (not to mentionamong women) along every possible fault line has made the concept of woman elusive, anexcuse for the matrix of women's dominations of each other. For me - and for many who sharea similar historical location in white, professional middle-class, female, radical, North American,mid-adult bodies - the sources of a crisis in political identity are legion. The recent history formuch of the US left and US feminism has been a response to this kind of crisis by endlesssplitting and searches for a new essential unity. But there has also been a growing recognitionof another response through coalition - affinity, not identity., from a consideration of specific historical moments in theformation of the new political voice called women of colour, has theorized a hopeful model ofpolitical identity called 'oppositional consciousness', born of the skills for reading webs of powerby those refused stable membership in the social categories of race, sex, or class. 'Women ofcolor', a name contested at its origins by those whom it would incorporate, as well as ahistorical consciousness marking systematic breakdown of all the signs of Man in 'Western'traditions, constructs a kind of postmodernist identity out of otherness, difference, andspecificity. This postmodernist identity is fully political, whatever might be said abut otherpossible postmodernisms. Sandoval's oppositional consciousness is about contradic156tory locations and heterochronic calendars, not about relativisms and pluralisms.Sandoval emphasizes the lack of any essential criterion for identifying who is a woman ofcolour. She notes that the definition of the group has been by conscious appropriation ofnegation. For example, a Chicana or US black woman has not been able to speak as a womanor as a black person or as a Chicano. Thus, she was at the bottom of a cascade of negativeidentities, left out of even the privileged oppressed authorial categories called 'women andblacks', who claimed to make the important revolutions. The category 'woman' negated all nonwhite women; 'black' negated all non-black people, as well as all black women. But there wasalso no 'she', no singularity, but a sea of differences among US women who have affirmed theirhistorical identity as US women of colour. This identity marks out a self-consciously constructedspace that cannot affirm the capacity to act on the basis of natural identification, but only onthe basis of conscious coalition, of affinity, of political kinship.8 Unlike the 'woman' of somestreams of the white women's movement in the United States, there is no naturalization of thematrix, or at least this is whatSandoval's argument has to be seen as one potent formulation for feminists out of the worldwide development of anti-colonialist discourse; that is to say, discourse dissolving the 'West'and its highest product - the one who is not animal, barbarian, or woman; man, that is, theauthor of a cosmos called history. As orientalism is deconstructed politically and semiotically,the identities of the occident destabilize, including those of feminists.9 Sandoval argues that'women of colour' have a chance to build an effective unity that does not replicate theimperializing, totalizing revolutionary subjects of previous Marxisms and feminisms which hadnot faced the consequences of the disorderly polyphony emerging from decolonization.Katie King has emphasized the limits of identification and the political/ poetic mechanics ofidentification built into reading 'the poem', that generative core of cultural feminism. Kingcriticizes the persistent tendency among contemporary feminists from different 'moments' or'conversations' in feminist practice to taxonomize the women's movement to make one's ownpolitical tendencies appear to be the telos of the whole. These taxonomies tend to remakefeminist history so that it appears to be an ideological struggle among coherent types persistingover time, especially those typical units called radical, liberal, and socialist-feminism. Literally,all other feminisms are either incorporated or marginalized, usually by building an explicitontology and epistemology Taxonomies of feminism produce epistemologies to policedeviation from official women's experience. And of course, 'women's culture', like women ofcolour, is consciously created bymechanisms inducing affinity. The rituals of poetry, music, and certain forms of academicpractice have been pre-eminent. The politics of race and culture in the US women's movementsare intimately interwoven. The common achievement of King and Sandoval is learning how tocraft a poetic/political unity without relying on a logic of appropriation, incorpora-tion, andtaxonomic identification.The theoretical and practical struggle against unity-through-domination or unity-throughincorporation ironically not only undermines the justifica-tions for patriarchy, colonialism,humanism, positivism, essentialism, scient-ism, and other unlamented -isms, but all claims foran organic or natural standpoint. I think that radical and socialist/Marxist-feminisms have alsoundermined their/our own epistemological strategies and that this is a crucially valuable step inimagining possible unities. It remains to be seen whether all 'epistemologies' as Westernpolitical people have known them fail us in the task to build effective affinities.It is important to note that the effort to construct revolutionary stand-points, epistemologies asachievements of people committed to changing the world, has been part of the processshowing the limits of identification. The acid tools of postmodernist theory and the constructivetools of ontological discourse about revolutionary subjects might be seen as ironic allies indissolving Western selves in the interests of survival. We are excruciatingly conscious of what itmeans to have a historically constituted body. But with the loss of innocence in our origin, thereis no expulsion from the Garden either. Our politics lose the indulgence of guilt with the naiveteof innocence. But what would another political myth for socialist-feminism look like? What kindof politics could embrace partial, contradictory, permanently unclosed constructions of personaland collective selves and still be faithful, effective - and, ironically, socialist-feminist?I do not know of any other time in history when there was greater need for political unity toconfront effectively the dominations of 'race', 'gender', 'sexuality', and 'class'. I also do notknow of any other time when the kind of unity we might help build could have been possible.None of 'us' have any longer the symbolic or material capability of dictating the shape of realityto any of'them'. Or at least 'we' cannot claim innocence from practicing such dominations.White women, including socialist feminists, discovered (that is, were forced kicking andscreaming to notice) the non-innocence of the category 'woman'. That consciousness changesthe geography of all previous categories; it denatures them as heat denatures a fragile protein.Cyborg feminists have to argue that 'we' do not want any more natural matrix of unity and thatno construction is whole. Innocence, and the corollary insistence on victimhood as the onlyground for insight, has done enough damage. But the constructed revolutionary subject mustgive late-twentieth century people pause as well. In the fraying of identities and in the reflexive strategies forconstructing them, the possibility opens up for weaving something other than a shroud for theday after the apocalypse that so prophetically ends salvation history.Both Marxist/socialist-feminisms and radical feminisms have simul-taneously naturalized anddenatured the category 'woman' and conscious-ness of the social lives of 'women'. Perhaps aschematic caricature can highlight both kinds of moves. Marxian socialism is rooted in ananalysis of wage labour which reveals class structure. The consequence of the wagerelationship is systematic alienation, as the worker is dissociated from his (sic) product.Abstraction and illusion rule in knowledge, domination rules in practice. Labour is the preeminently privileged category enabling the Marxist to overcome illusion and find that point ofview which is necessary for changing the world. Labour is the humanizing activity that makesman; labour is an ontological category permitting the knowledge of a subject, and so theknowledge of subjugation and alienation.In faithful filiation, socialist-feminism advanced by allying itself with the basic analytic strategiesof Marxism. The main achievement of both Marxist feminists and socialist feminists was toexpand the category of labour to accommodate what (some) women did, even when the wagerelation was subordinated to a more comprehensive view of labour under capitalist patriarchy.In particular, women's labour in the household and women's activity as mothers generally (thatis, reproduction in the socialist-feminist sense), entered theory on the authority of analogy tothe Marxian concept of labour. The unity of women here rests on an epistemology based on theontological structure of'labour'. Marxist/socialist-feminism does not 'natur-alize' unity; it is apossible achievement based on a possible standpoint rooted in social relations. Theessentializing move is in the ontological structure of labour or of its analogue, women'sactivity.11 The inheritance of Marxian humanism, with its pre-eminently Western self, is thedifficulty for me. The contribution from these formulations has been the emphasis on the dailyversion of radical feminism is itself a caricature of theappropriating, incorporating, totalizing tendencies of Western theories of identity groundingaction.12 It is factually and politically wrong to assimilate all of the diverse 'moments' or'conversations' in recent women's politics named radical feminism to MacKinnon's version. Butthe teleological logic of her theory shows how an epistemology and ontology - including theirnegations - erase or police difference. Only one of the effects of MacKinnon's theory is therewriting of the history of the polymorphous field called radical feminism. The major effect isthe production of a theoryof experience, of women's identity, that is a kind of apocalypse for all revolutionary standpoints.That is, the totalization built into this tale of radical feminism achieves its end - the unity ofwomen - by enforcing the experience of and testimony to radical non-being. As for the Marxist/socialist feminist, consciousness is an achievement, not a natural fact. And MacKinnon's theoryeliminates some of the difficulties built into humanist revolutionary subjects, but at the cost ofradical reductionism. MacKinnon argues that feminism necessarily adopted a different analyt-ical strategy fromMarxism, looking first not at the structure of class, but at the structure of sex/gender and itsgenerative relationship, men's constitu-tion and appropriation of women sexually. Ironically,MacKinnon's 'ontology' constructs a non-subject, a non-being. Another's desire, not the self'slabour, is the origin of 'woman'. She therefore develops a theory of consciousness that enforceswhat can count as 'women's' experience - anything that names sexual violation, indeed, sexitself as far as 'women' can be concerned. Feminist practice is the construction of this form ofconsciousness; that is, the self-knowledge of a self-who-is-not.Perversely, sexual appropriation in this feminism still has the epistemolo-gical status of labour;that is to say, the point from which an analysis able to contribute to changing the world mustflow. But sexual object)fication, not alienation, is the consequence of the structure ofsex/gender. In the realm of knowledge, the result of sexual objectification is illusion andabstraction. However, a woman is not simply alienated from her product, but in a deep sensedoes not exist as a subject, or even potential subject, since she owes her existence as a womanto sexual appropriation. To be constituted by another's desire is not the same thing as to beIn my taxonomy, which like any other taxonomy is a re-inscription of history, radical feminismcan accommodate all the activities of women named by socialist feminists as forms of labouronly if the activity can somehow be sexualized. Reproduction had different tones of meaningsfor the two tendencies, one rooted in labour, one in sex, both calling the consequences ofdomination and ignorance of social and personal reality 'false consciousness'.Beyond either the diff~culties or the contributions in the argument of any one author, neitherMarxist nor radical feminist points of view have tended to embrace the status of a partialexplanation; both were regularly constituted as totalities. Western explanation has demandedas much; how else could the 'Western' author incorporate its others? Each tried to annex otherforms of domination by expanding its basic categories through analogy, simple listing, oraddition. Embarrassed silence about race among white radical and socialist feminists was onemajor, devastating political consequence. History and polyvocality disappear into politicaltaxonomies that try to establish genealogies. There was no structural room for race (or formuch else) in theory claiming to reveal the construction of the category woman and socialgroup women as a unified or totalizable whole. The structure of my caricature looks like this:socialist feminism--structure of class // wage labour // alienation labour, by analogyreproduction, by extension sex, by addition race radical feminism - structure of gender // sexualappropriation // objectificationsex, by analogy labour, by extension reproduction, by addition raceIn another context, the French theorist, Julia Kristeva, claimed women appeared as a historicalgroup after the Second World War, along with groups like youth. Her dates are doubtful; butwe are now accustomed to remembering that as objects of knowledge and as historical actors,'race' did not always exist, 'class' has a historical genesis, and 'homosexuals' are quite junior. Itis no accident that the symbolic system of the family of man - and so the essence of woman -breaks up at the same moment that networks of connection among people on the planet areunprecedentedly multiple, pregnant, and complex. 'Advanced capitalism' is inadequate toconvey the structure of this historical moment. In the 'Western' sense, the end of man is atstake. It is no accident that woman disintegrates into women in our time. Perhaps socialistfeminists were not substantially guilty of producing essentialist theory that suppressed women'sparticularity and contradictory interests. I think we have been, at least through unreflectiveparticipation in the logics, languages, and practices of white humanism and through searchingfor a single ground of domination to secure our revolutionary voice. Now we have less excuse.But in the consciousness of our failures, weIn this attempt at an epistemological and political position, I would like to sketch a picture ofpossible unity, a picture indebted to socialist and feminist principles of design. The frame for mysketch is set by the extent and importance of rearrangements in world-wide social relations tiedto science and technology. I argue for a politics rooted in claims about fundamental changes inthe nature of class, race, and gender in an emerging system of world order analogous in itsnovelty and scope to that created by industrial capitalism; we are living through a movementfrom an organic, industrial society to a polymorphous, information system--from all work to allplay, a deadly game. Simultaneously material and ideological, the dichotomies may beexpressed in the following chart of transitions from the comfortable old hierarchical dominationsto the scary new networks I have called the informatics of domination:Representation SimulationBourgeois novel, realism Science fiction, postmodernismOrganism Biotic ComponentDepth, integrity Surface, boundaryHeat NoiseBiology as clinical practice Biology as inscriptionPhysiology Communications engineeringSmall group SubsystemPerfection OptimizationEugenics Population ControlDecadence, Magic Mountain Obsolescence, Future ShockHygiene Stress ManagementMicrobiology, tuberculosis Immunology, AIDSOrganic division of labour Ergonomics/cybernetics of labourFunctional specialization Modular constructionReproduction ReplicationOrganic sex role specialization Optimal genetic strategiesBioogical determinism Evolutionary inertia, constraintsCommunity ecology EcosystemRacial chain of being Neo-imperialism, United Nations humanismScientific management in home/factory Global factory/Electronid cottageFamily/Market/Factory Women in the Integrated CircuitFamily wage Comparable worthPublic/Private Cyborg citizenshipNature/Culture fields of differenceCo-operation Communicatins enhancemenetFreud LacanSex Genetic engineeringlabour RoboticsMind Artificial IntelligenceSecond World War Star WarsWhite Capitalist Patriarchy Informatics of DominationThis list suggests several interesting things. First, the objects on the right-hand side cannotbe coded as 'natural', a realization that subverts naturalistic coding for the left-hand side aswell. We cannot go back ideologically or materially. It's not just that igod'is dead; so is the'goddess'. Or both are revivified in the worlds charged with microelectronic and biotechnologicalpolitics. In relation to objects like biotic components, one must not think in terms of essentialproperties, but in terms of design, boundary constraints, rates of flows, systems logics, costs oflowering constraints. Sexual reproduction is one kind of reproductive strategy among many,with costs and benefits as a function of the system environment. Ideologies of sexualreproduction can no longer reasonably call on notions of sex and sex role as organic aspects innatural objects like organisms and families. Such reasoning will be unmasked as irrational, andironically corporate executives reading Playboy and anti-porn radical feminists will make strangebedfellows in jointly unmasking the irrationalism.Likewise for race, ideologies about human diversity have to be formulated in terms offrequencies of parameters, like blood groups or intelligence scores. It is 'irrational' to invokeconcepts like primitive and civilized. For liberals and radicals, the search for integrated socialsystems gives way to a new practice called 'experimental ethnography' in which an organicobject dissipates in attention to the play of writing. At the level of ideology, we see translationsof racism and colonialism into languages of development and under-development, rates andconstraints of modernization. Any objects or persons can be reasonably thought of in terms ofdisassembly and reassembly; no 'natural' architectures constrain system design. The financialdistricts in all the world's cities, as well as the export-processing and free-trade zones, proclaimthis elementary fact of'late capitalism'. The entire universe of objects that can be knownscientifically must be formulated as problems incommunications engineering (for the managers) or theories of the text (for those who wouldresist). Both are cyborg semiologies.One should expect control strategies to concentrate on boundary conditions and interfaces, onrates of flow across boundaries-- and not on the integrity of natural objects. 'Integrity' or'sincerity' of the Western self gives way to decision procedures and expert systems. Forexample, control strategies applied to women's capacities to give birth to new human beingswill be developed in the languages of population control and maximization of goal achievementfor individual decision-makers. Control strategies will be formulated in terms of rates, costs ofconstraints, degrees of freedom. Human beings, like any other component or subsystem, mustbe localized in a system architecture whose basic modes of operation are probabilistic,statistical. No objects, spaces, or bodies are sacred in themselves; any component can beinterfaced with any other if the proper standard, the proper code, can be constructed forprocessing signals in a common language. Exchange in this world transcends the universaltranslation effected by capitalist markets that Marx analysed so well. The privileged pathologyaffecting all kinds of components in this universe is stress - communications breakdown(Hogness, 1983). The cyborg is not subject to Foucault's biopolitics; the cyborg simulatespolitics, a much more potent field of operations.This kind of analysis of scientific and cultural objects of knowledge which have appearedhistorically since the Second World War prepares us to notice some important inadequacies infeminist analysis which has proceeded as if the organic, hierarchical dualisms ordering discoursein 'the West' since Aristotle still ruled. They have been cannibalized, or as Zoe Sofia (Sofoulis)might put it, they have been 'techno-digested'. The dichotomies between mind and body,animal and human, organism and machine, public and private, nature and culture, men andwomen, primitive and civilized are all in question ideologically. The actual situation of women istheir integration/ exploitation into a world system of production/reproduction and communication called the informatics of domination. The home, workplace, market, public arena,the body itself- all can be dispersed and interfaced in nearly infinite, polymorphous ways, withlarge consequences for women and others - consequences that themselves are very differentfor different people and which make potent oppositional international movements difficult toimagine and essential for survival. One important route for reconstructing socialist-feministpolitics is through theory and practice addressed to the social relations of science andtechnology, including crucially the systems of myth and meanings structuring our imaginations.The cyborg is a kind of disassembled and reassembled, postmodern collective and personal self.This is the self feminists must code.Communications technologies and biotechnologies are the crucial tools recrafting our bodies.These tools embody and enforce new social relations for women world-wide. Technologies andscientific discourses can be partially understood as formalizations, i.e., as frozen moments, ofthe fluid social interactions constituting them, but they should also be viewed as instruments forenforcing meanings. The boundary is permeable between tool and myth, instrument andconcept, historical systems of social relations and historical anatomies of possible bodies,including objects of knowledge. Indeed, myth and tool mutually constitute each other.Furthermore, communications sciences and modern biologies are constructed by a commonmove - the translation of the world into a problem of coding, a search for a common languagein which all resistance to instrumental control disappears and all heterogeneity can besubmitted to disassembly, reassembly, investment, and exchange.In communications sciences, the translation of the world into a problem in coding can beillustrated by looking at cybernetic (feedback-controlled) systems theories applied to telephonetechnology, computer design, weapons deployment, or data base construction andmaintenance. In each case, solution to the key questions rests on a theory of language andcontrol; the key operation is determining the rates, directions, and probabilities of flow of aquantity called information. The world is subdivided by boundaries differentially permeable toinformation. Information is just that kind of quantifiable element (unit, basis of unity) whichallows universal translation, and so unhindered instrumental power (called effectivecommunication). The biggest threat to such power is interruption of communication. Anysystem breakdown is a function of stress. The fundamentals of this technology can becondensed into the metaphor C31, command-controlcommunication-intelligence, the military'ssymbol for its operations theory.In modern biologies, the translation of the world into a problem in coding can be illustrated bymolecular genetics, ecology, sociobiological evolutionary theory, and immunobiology. Theorganism has been translated into prob-lems of genetic coding and read-out. Biotechnology, awriting technology, informs research broadly.14 In a sense, organisms have ceased to exist asobjects of knowledge, giving way to biotic components, i.e., special kinds of informationprocessing devices. The analogous moves in ecology could be examined by probing the historyand utility of the concept of the ecosystem. Immunobiology and associated medical practicesare rich exemplars of the privilege of coding and recognition systems as objects of knowledge,as constructions of bodily reality for us. Biology here is a kind of cryptography. Research isnecessarily a kind of intelligence activity. Ironies abound. A stressed system goes awry; itscommunication processes break down; it fails to recognize the difference between self andother. Human babies withbaboon hearts evoke national ethical perplexity-- for animal rights activists at least as much asfor the guardians of human purity. In the US gay men and intravenous drug users are the'privileged' victims of an awful immune system disease that marks (inscribes on the body)confusion of boundaries and moral pollution (Treichler, 1987).But these excursions into communications sciences and biology have been at a rarefied level;there is a mundane, largely economic reality to support my claim that these sciences andtechnologies indicate fundamental transforma-tions in the structure of the world for us.Communications technologies depend on electronics. Modern states, multinational corporations,military power, welfare state apparatuses, satellite systems, political processes, fabrication ofour imaginations, labour-control systems, medical construc-tions of our bodies, commercialpornography, the international division of labour, and religious evangelism depend intimatelyupon electronics. Micro-electronics is the technical basis of simulacra; that is, of copies withoutoriginals.Microelectronics mediates the translations of labour into robotics and word processing, sex intogenetic engineering and reproductive technologies, and mind into artificial intelligence anddecision procedures. The new biotechnologies concern more than human reproducdon. Biologyas a powerful engineering science for redesigning materials and processes has revolutionaryimplications for industry, perhaps most obvious today in areas of fermentadon, agriculture, andenergy. Communicadons sciences and biology are construcdons of natural-technical objects ofknowledge in which the difference between machine and organism is thoroughly blurred; mind,body, and tool are on very intimate terms. The 'multinational' material organization of theproduction and reproduction of daily life and the symbolic organization of the production andreproduction of culture and imagination seem equally implicated. The boundary-maintainingimages of base and superstructure, public and private, or material and ideal never seemedmore feeble.I have used Rachel Grossman's (1980) image of women in the integrated circuit to name thesituation of women in a world so intimately restructured through the social relations of scienceand technology.15 I used the odd circumlocution, 'the social relations of science andtechnology', to indicate that we are not dealing with a technological determinism, but with ahistorical system depending upon structured relations among people. But the phrase shouldalso indicate that science and technology provide fresh sources of power, that we need freshsources of analysis and political action (Latour, 1984). Some of the rearrangements of race,sex, and class rooted in high-tech-facilitated social relations can make socialist-feminism morerelevant to effective progressive politics.know how towrite the body; how to weave eroticism, cosmology, and politics from imagery of embodiment,and especially for Wittig, from imagery of fragmentation and reconstitution of bodies.24American radical feminists like Susan Griffnn, Audre Lorde, and Adrienne Rich have profoundlyaffected our political imaginations - and perhaps restricted too much what we allow as afriendly body and political language.25 They insist on the organic, opposing it to thetechnological. But their symbolic systems and the related positions of ecofeminism and feministpaganism, replete with organicisms, can only be understood in Sandoval's terms as oppositionalideologies fitting the late twentieth century. They would simply bewilder anyone notpreoccupied with the machines and consciousness of late capitalism. In that sense they are partof the cyborg world. But there are also great riches for feminists in explicitly embracing thepossibilides inherent in the breakdown of clean disdnctions between organism and machine andsimilar distinctions structuring the Western self. It is the simultaneity of breakdowns that cracksthe matrices of domination and opens geometric possibilities. What might be learned frompersonal and political 'technological' pollution? I look briefly at two overlapping groups of textsfor their insight into the construction of a potentially helpful cyborg myth: constructions ofwomen of colour and monstrous selves in feminist science fiction.workers, female and feminized, are supposed to regard as the enemy prevendug theirsolidarity, threatening their security. Onshore, inside the boundary of the United States, SisterOutsider is a potential amidst the races and ethnic identities of women manipulated for division,competition, and exploitation in the same industries. 'Women of colour' are the preferred labourforce for the science-based industries, the real women for whom the world-wide sexual market,labour market, and politics of reproduction kaleidoscope into daily life. Young Korean womenhired in the sex industry and in electronics assembly are recruited from high schools, educatedfor the integrated circuit. Literacy, especially in English, distinguishes the 'cheap' female labourso attractive to the multinationals.men through a history of risking death to learn and to teach reading and wridng. Writing has aspecial significance for all colonized groups. Writing has been crucial to the Western myth of thedistinction between oral and written cultures, primitive and civilized mentalities, and morerecently to the erosion of that distinction in 'postmodernist' theories attacking the phallogocentrism of the West, with its worship of the monotheistic, phallic, authoritative, and singularwork, the unique and perfect name.26 Contests for the meanings of writing are a major form ofcontemporary political struggle. Releasing the play of writing is deadly serious. The poetry andstories of US women of colour are repeatedly about writing, about access to the power tosignify; but this dme that power must be neither phallic nor innocent. Cyborg writing must notbe about the Fall, the imagination of a once-upon-a-time wholeness before language, beforewriting, before Man. Cyborg writing is about the power to survive, not on the basis of originalinnocence, but on the basis of seizing the tools to mark the world that marked them as other.The tools are often stories, retold stories, versions that reverse and displace the hierarchicaldualisms of naturalized identities. In retelling origin stories, cyborg authors subvert the centralmyths of origin of Western culture. We have all been colonized by those origin myths, with theirlonging for fulfilment in apocalypse. The phallogocentrie origin stories most crucial for feministcyborgs are built into the literal technologies - teehnologies that write the world, biotechnologyand microelectronics - that have recently textualized our bodies as code problems on the grid ofC3I. Feminist cyborg stories have the task of recoding communication and intelligence tosubvert command and control.Figuratively and literally, language politics pervade the struggles of women of colour; andstories about language have a special power in the rich contemporary writing by US women ofcolour. For example, retellings of the stom~ of the indigenous woman Malinche, mother of themesdzo 'bastard' race of the new world, master of languages, and mistress of Cortes, carryspecial meaning for Chicana constructions of identity. Cherrie Moraga (1983) in Loving in theWar Years explores the themes of identity when one never possessed the original language,never told the original story, never resided in the harmony of legitimate heterosexuality in thegarden of culture, and so cannot base identity on a myth or a fall from innocence and right tonatural names, mother's or father's.27 Moraga's writing, her superb literacy, is presented in herpoetry as the same kind of violation as Malinche's mastery of the conqueror's language -- aviolation, an illegitimate production, that allows survival. Moraga's language is not 'whole'; it isself-consciously spliced, a chimera of English and Spanish, both conqueror's languages. But it isthis chimeric monster, without claim to an original language beforeviolation, that crafts the erode, competent, potent identities of women of colour. Sister Outsiderhints at the possibility of world survival not because of her innocence, but because of her abilityto live on the boundaries, to write without the founding myth of original wholeness, with itsinescapable apocalypse of final return to a deathly oneness that Man has imagined to be theinnocent and all-powerful Mother, freed at the End from another spiral of appropriation by herson. Writing marks Moraga's body, affirms it as the body of a woman of colour, against thepossibility of passing into the unmarked category of the Anglo father or into the orientalist mythof 'original illiteracy' of a mother that never was. Malinche was mother here, not Eve beforeeating the forbidden fruit. Writing affirms Sister Outsider, not the Woman-before-the-Fall-intoWriting needed by the phallogocentric Family of Man.Writing is pre-eminently the technology of cyborgs, etched surfaces of the late twentiethcentury. Cyborg politics is the struggle for language and the struggle against perfectcommunication, against the one code that translates all meaning perfectly, the central dogma ofphallogocentrism. That is why cyborg politics insist on noise and advocate pollution, rejoicing inthe illegitimate fusions of animal and machine. These are the couplings which make Man andWoman so problematic, subverting the structure of desire, the force imagined to generatelanguage and gender, and so subverting the structure and modes of reproduction of 'Western'idendty, of nature and culture, of mirror and eye, slave and master, body and mind. 'We' didnot originally choose to be cyborgs, but choice grounds a liberal politics and epistemology thatimagines the reproduction of individuals before the wider replications of 'texts'.From the perspective of cyborgs, freed of the need to ground politics in 'our' privileged positionof the oppression that incorporates all other dominations, the innocence of the merely violated,the ground of those closer to nature, we can see powerful possibilities. Feminisms andMarxisms have run aground on Western epistemological imperatives to construct arevolutionary subject from the perspective of a hierarchy of oppressions and/or a latent positionof moral superiority, innocence, and greater closeness to nature. With no available originaldream of a common language or original symbiosis promising protection from hostile'masculine' separation, but written into the play of a text that has no finally privileged readingor salvation history, to recognize 'oneself' as fully implicated in the world, frees us of the needto root politics in identification, vanguard parties, purity, and mothering. Stripped of identity,the bastard race teaches about the power of the margins and the importance of a mother likeMalinche. Women of colour have transformed her from the evil mother of177masculinist fear into the originally literate mother who teaches survival.This is not just literary deconstruction, but liminal transformation. Every, story that begins withoriginal innocence and privileges the return to wholeness imagines the drama of life to beindividuation, separation, the birth of the self, the tragedy of autonomy, the fall into writing,alienation; that is, war, tempered by imaginary respite in the bosom of the Other. These plotsare ruled by a reproductive politics --rebirth without flaw, perfection, abstraction. In this plotwomen are imagined either better or worse off, but all agree they have less selflhood, weakerindividuation, more fusion to the oral, to Mother, less at stake in masculine autonomy. But thereis another route to having less at stake in masculine autonomy, a route that does not passthrough Woman, Primitive, Zero, the Mirror Stage and its imaginaw. It passes through womenand other present-tense, illegitimate cyborgs, not of Woman born, who refuse the ideologicalresources of victimization so as to have a real life. These cyborgs are the people who refuse todisappear on cue, no matter how many dmes a 'western' commentator remarks on the sadpassing of another primitive, another organic group done in by 'Western' technology, bywriting.28 These real-life cyborgs (for example, the Southeast Asian village women workersinJapanese and US electronics firms described by Aihwa Ong) are actively rewriting the texts oftheir bodies and sociedes. Sumival is the stakes in this play of readings.To recapitulate, certain dualisms have been persistent in Western traditions; they have all beensystemic to the logics and practices of domination of women, people of colour, nature, workers,animals - in short, domination of all constituted as others, whose task is to mirror the self. Chiefamong these troubling dualisms are self/other, mind/body, culture/nature, male/female,civilized/primitive, reality/appearance, whole/part, agent/resource, maker/ made,active/passive, right/wrong, truth/illusion, totaVpartial, God/man. The self is the One who is notdominated, who knows that by the semice of the other, the other is the one who holds thefuture, who knows that by the experience of domination, which gives the lie to the autonomy ofthe self. To be One is to be autonomous, to be powerful, to be God; but to be One is to be anillusion, and so to be involved in a dialectic of apocalypse with the other. Yet to be other is tobe multiple, without clear boundary, frayed, insubstantial. One is too few, but two are tooHigh-tech culture challenges these dualisms in intriguing ways. It is not clear who makes andwho is made in the relation between human and machine. It is not clear what is mind and whatbody in machines that resolve into coding practices. In so far as we know ourselves in bothformal discourse (for example, biology) and in daily practice (for example, the homeworkeconomy in the integrated circuit), we find ourselves to be cyborgs, hybrids, mosaics, chimeras.Biological organisms have become biotic systems, com178munications devices like others. There is no fundamental, ontological separation in our formalknowledge of machine and organism, of technical and organic. The replicant Rachel in theRidley Scott film Blade Runner stands as the image of a cyborg culture's fear, love, andconfusion.One consequence is that our sense of connection to our tools is heightened. The trance stateexperienced by many computer users has become a staple of science-fiction film and culturaljokes. Perhaps paraplegics and other severely handicapped people can (and sometimes do)have the most intense experiences of complex hybridization with other communicationdevices.29 Anne McCaffrey's pre-feminist The Ship Who Sang (1969) explored theconsciousness of a cyborg, hybrid of girl's brain and complex machinery, formed after the birthof a severely handicapped child. Gender, sexuality, embodiment, skill: all were reconstituted inthe story. Why should our bodies end at the skin, or include at best other beings encapsulatedby skin? From the seventeenth century dll now, machines could be animated - given ghostlysouls to make them speak or move or to account for their orderly development and mentalcapacides. Or organisms could be mechan-ized - reduced to body understood as resource ofmind. These machine/ organism relationships are obsolete, unnecessary. For us, in imaginationand in other practice, machines can be prosthetic devices, intimate components, friendly selves.We don't need organic holism to give impermeable whole-ness, the total woman and herfeminist variants (mutants?). Let me conclude this point by a very partial reading of the logic ofthe cyborg monsters of my second group of texts, feminist science fiction.The cyborgs populating feminist science fiction make very problematic the statuses of man orwoman, human, artefact, member of a race, individual endty, or body. Katie King clarifies howpleasure in reading these fictions is not largely based on idendfication. Students facingJoannaRuss for the first time, students who have learned to take modernist writers like James Joyce orVirginia Woolf without flinching, do not know what to make of The Adventures of Alyx or TheFemale Man, where characters refuse the reader's search for innocent wholeness while grantingthe wish for heroic quests, exuberant eroticism, and serious politics. The Female Man is thestory of four versions of one genotype, all of whom meet, but even taken together do not makea whole, resolve the dilemmas of violent moral action, or remove the growing scandal ofgender. The feminist science fiction of Samuel R. Delany, especially Tales of Neveyon, mocksstories of origin by redoing the neolithic revolution, replaying the founding moves of Westerncivilization to subvert their plausibility. James Tiptree, Jr, an author whose fiction was regardedas particularly manly undl her 'true' gender was revealed, tells tales of reproduction based onnon-mammalian technologies like alternation of generations of male brood pouches and malenurturing. John Varleyconstructs a supreme cyborg in his arch-feminist exploration of Gaea, a mad goddess-planettrickster-old woman-technological device on whose surface an extraordinary array of postcyborg symbioses are spawned. Octavia Butler writes of an African sorceress pithug her powersof transformation against the genetic manipulations of her rival (Wild Seed), of dme warps thatbring a modern US black woman into slavery where her actions in relation to her white masterancestor determine the possibility of her own birth (Kindred), and of the illegidmate insightsinto idendty and community of an adopted cross-species child who came to know the enem' asself (Survivor). In Dawn (1987), the first instalment of a series called Xenogenesis, Butler tellsthe story of Lilith Iyapo, whose personal name recalls Adam's first and repudiated wife andwhose family name marks her status as the widow of the son of Nigerian immigrants to the US.A black woman and a mother whose child is dead, Lilith mediates the transformation ofhumanity through genetic exchange with extra-terrestrial lovers/rescuers/destroyers/geneticengineers, who reform earth's habitats after the nuclear holocaust and coerce surviving humansinto intimate fusion with them. It is a novel that interrogates reproductive, linguishc, andnuclear politics in a mythic field structured by late twentieth-century race and gender.Because it is particularly rich in boundary transgressions, Vonda McIn-tyre's Superluminal canclose this truncated catalogue of promising and dangerous monsters who help redefine thepleasures and politics of embodiment and feminist writing. In a fiction where no character is'simply' human, human status is highly problematic. Orca, a genetically altered diver, can speakwith killer whales and survive deep ocean conditions, but she longs to explore space as a pilot,necessitating bionic implants jeopardizing her kinship with the divers and cetaceans.Transformations are effected by virus vectors carrying a new developmental code, by transplantsurgery, by implants of microelectronic devices, by analogue doubles, and other means. Lacneabecomes a pilot by accepting a heart implant and a host of other alterations allowing survival intransit at speeds exceeding that of light. Radu Dracul survives a virus-caused plague in hisouterworld planet to find himself with a time sense that changes the boundaries of spatialperception for the whole species. All the characters explore the limits of language; the dream ofcommunicating experience; and the necessity of limitation, partiality, and indmacy even in thisworld of protean transformation and connection. Superluminal stands also for the definingcontradictions of a cyborg world in another sense; it embodies textually the intersection offeminist theory and colonial discourse in the science fiction I have alluded to in this chapter.This is a conjunction with a long history that many 'First World' feminists have tried to repress,including myself in my readings of Superluminal before being called to account by Zoe Sofoulis,whose different location in the world system's informatics of domin-ation made her acutely alertto the imperialist moment of all science fiction cultures, including women's science fiction. Froman Australian feminist sensitivity, Sofoulis remembered more readily McIntyre's role as writer ofthe adventures of Captain Kirk and Spock in TV's Star Trek series than her rewriting theromance in Superluminal.Monsters have always defined the limits of community in Western imaginations. The Centaursand Amazons of ancient Greece established the limits of the centred polls of the Greek malehuman by their disruption of marriage and boundary pollutions of the warrior with animality andwoman. Unseparated twins and hermaphrodites were the confused human material in earlymodern France who grounded discourse on the natural and supernatural, medical and legal,portents and diseases -- all crucial to establishing modern identity.30 The evolutionary andbehavioural sciences of monkeys and apes have marked the multiple boundaries of latetwentieth-century industrial identities. Cyborg monsters in feminist science fiction define quitedifferent political possibilities and limits from those proposed by the mundane fiction of Man andWoman.There are several consequences to taking seriously the imagery of cyborgs as other than ourenemies. Our bodies, ourselves; bodies are maps of power and identity. Cyborgs are noexception. A cyborg body is not innocent; it was not born in a garden; it does not seek unitaryidentity and so generate antagonistic dualisms without end (or until the world ends); it takesirony for granted. One is too few, and two is only one possibility. Intense pleasure in skill,machine skill, ceases to be a sin, but an aspect of embodiment. The machine is not an it to beanimated, worshipped, and dominated. The machine is us, our processes, an aspect of ourembodiment. We can be responsible for machines; they do not dominate or threaten us. Weare responsible for boundaries; we are they. Up till now (once upon a time), femaleembodiment seemed to be given, organic, necessary; and female embodiment seemed to meanskill in mothering and its metaphoric exten-sions. Only by being out of place could we takeintense pleasure in machines, and then with excuses that this was organic activity after all,appropriate to females. Cyborgs might consider more seriously the partial, fluid, sometimesaspect of sex and sexual embodiment. Gender might not be global identity after all, even if ithas profound historical breadth and depth.The ideologically charged question of what counts as daily activity, as experience, can beapproached by exploiting the cyborg image. Feminists have recently claimed that women aregiven to dailiness, that women more than men somehow sustain daily life, and so have aprivileged epistemo-logical position potentially. There is a compelling aspect to this claim, onereproductive sex. I would suggest that cyborgs have more todo with regeneration and are suspicious of the reproductive matrix and of most birthing. Forsalamanders, regeneration after injury, such as the loss of a limb, involves regrowth ofstructure and restoration of function with the constant possibility of twinning or other oddtopographical productions at the site of former injury. The regrown limb can be monstrous,duplicated, potent. We have all been injured, profoundly. We require regeneration, not rebirth,and the possibilities for our reconstitution include the utopian dream of the hope for amonstrous world without gender.Cyborg imagery can help express two crucial arguments in this essay: first, the production ofuniversal, totalizing theory is a major mistake that misses most of reality, probably always, butcertainly now; and second, taking responsibility for the social relations of science andtechnology means refusing an anti-science metaphysics, a demonology of technology, and someans embracing the skilful task of reconstructing the boundaries of daily life, in partialconnection with others, in communication with all of our parts. It is not just that science andtechnology are possible means of great human satisfaction, as well as a matrix of complexdominations. Cyborg imagery can suggest a way out of the maze of dualisms in which we haveexplained our bodies and our tools to ourselves. This is a dream not of a common language, butof a powerful infidel heteroglossia. It is an imagination of a feminist speaking in tongues tostrike fear into the circuits of the supersavers of the new right. It means both building anddestroying machines, identities, categories, relationships, space stories. Though both are boundin the spiral dance, I would rather be a cyborg
