Sympathy for transgender people cannot trump objective reality.Last week, a member of my Orthodox Jewish congregation approached me at synagogue to tell me a story. Many of the women in the congregation exercise at a females-only gym for modesty purposes. The gym is successful; its main constituency is religious women who dont wish to be stared at by men, or to see men in various states of undress.According to the congregation member, this month, a transgender womana biological male who suffers from gender dysphoriacame to the gym. This man, who retains his male biological characteristics, then entered the locker room and proceeded to disrobe. When told by management that he could use a private dressing room, he refused, announcing that he was a woman and could disrobe in front of all the other women.The predictable result: Many of the actual biological women began cancelling their memberships. When the management asked people higher in the chain, they were simply told that to require the man to use a private dressing room or to reject his membership would subject the company to litigation and possible boycott. So the gym will simply have to lose its chief clientele because a man with a mental disorder believes he has the right to disrobe in front of women.As it turns out, there are indeed public-policy consequences to the question of transgender pronouns. Those public-policy questions all revolve around a central issue: Can subjective perception trump objective observation? If the answer is yes, tyranny of the individual becomes the order of the day. We all must bow before the subjective wants, needs, and desires of people who require special protection from lifes realities. We must reeducate generations of people to ignore science in favor of feelings. We must strong-arm individuals into abandoning central planks of their morality in the name of sensitivity.Its not just women who wish to avoid indecent exposure. Its doctors. Take, for example, a New York Times column this week by a transgender woman named Andrea Long Chu. The article, titled My New Vagina Wont Make Me Happy, argues that sex reassignment surgerya gross euphemism, given that sex is not assigned in the first place, except by biologyshould be available to anyone based simply on want. Chu acknowledges that his new vagina is in fact not a vagina but a wound and that it will require regular, painful attention to maintain. Chu acknowledges that his dysphoria has balloon[ed] since I began transition.Chu admits,I was not suicidal before hormones. Now I often am. Still, Chu says, he should be given transgender surgery based simply on want. Nonmaleficence is a principle violated in its very observation, Chu states. Its true purpose is not to shield patients from injury but to install the medical professional as a little king of someone elses body.NOW WATCH: 'Michael Cohen Delivers Trump Accusations Before Congress'Michael Cohen Delivers Trump Accusations Before CongressMeanwhile, Twitter announced this week that it would seek to ban those who misgender or deadname transgender people. In other words, if you note that Chelsea Manning or Caitlyn Jenner is a man, or if you use the names Bradley or Bruce with regard to the aforementioned transgender people, Twitter could ban you for repeated and/or non-consensual slurs. So you will abide by subjective self-definition, or you will be censored. Twitter recently banned a leftist feminist for merely noting that sex is biological and that men cannot become women.It doesnt stop there. As Walt Heyer of The Federalist reports, a Texas divorce case now pits a mother who dresses her six-year-old male child, James, as a girl and calls him Luna against Jamess father, whom she is accusing of child abuse for refusing to treat James as a girl. Heyer reports, She is also seeking to require him to pay for the childs visits to a transgender-affirming therapist and transgender medical alterations, which may include hormonal sterilization starting at age eight. James, as it turns out, prefers being called James and being treated as a boy by his father. Thats not stopping Mom. Refusing to abide by the judgment of a six-year-oldor in this case, a six-year-olds momcould mean losing your child in a world where we treat sex as malleable.There are real-world consequences to the deliberate rewriting of basic biology, and the substitution of subjectivity for objectivity. It means rewriting business operation, school curricula, medical treatment standards, censorship rules, and even parenting. Sympathy for those who suffer from gender dysphoria is obviously properno one wants transgender people harmed or targeted. But sympathy for a mental disorder should not trump either objective reality or competing priorities based on those objective realities. The Emperors New Clothes is not a story about the wonderful sensitivity of a population educated on the subjective desires of a ruler ensconced in sartorial self-definition. Falsehood crumbles in the light of day, no matter how sympathetic we are to those who wish to perpetuate itunless force becomes the order of the day.In this occasional series, Jordan Peterson writes from his international speaking tour for his book,  Rules for Life, where hes speaking to sold out crowds throughout North America, Europe and Australia.Part One (Scandinavia)Over the past few weeks, I have been in Oslo, twice; Helsinki, twice; Stockholm, twice; and Copenhagen, once. One of the trips to Stockholm was only for press interviews and television. The other six trips were part of my  Rules for Life tour, which has now covered  cities. The reason for the dual visits? We arranged relatively smaller venues for the lectures in those Scandinavian towns and they sold out immediately. Scandinavians are interested in what I am saying. They are radically over-represented among those who view my YouTube lectures.In the last lecture, in Helsinki, it was Finlands Fathers Day, so I talked about masculine virtue. In Stockholm, I concentrated more on what has come to be known as the gender paradox. Here is the paradox in a nutshell: as societies become more gender equal in their social and political policies, men and women become more different in certain aspects, rather than more similar.Rex Murphy: Oh, the sweet irony of Jordan Petersons fameCan you really live on meat alone? Everything you need to know about the carnivore dietHad you asked any group of social scientistsleft-wing, centrist, conservative (if you could find them)3 years ago Will egalitarian social policies in wealthy countries produce men and women who are more similar or more different? the majority would have certainly said, more similar. And, to some degree, that has happened. Women have entered the workforce en masse, and are participating at levels approaching or exceeding equality in many of the domains that were male majority prior to the s. ButAnd this is a major but. We seem to have reached the point of diminishing, or even reversing returns. Over the last five decades or so, psychologists have aggregated great numbers of descriptions of personality traits, using adjectives, phrases and sentences, throwing virtually every descriptor contained in human language into the mix, in a remarkably atheoretical manner. The method? Describe people every which way imaginable, and then use large samples and powerful statistics to sort out the resulting mess. The results? Something approaching a consensus among psychologists expert in measurement, known as psychometricians (or, less technically, personality psychologists). The latter happens to be my field, in addition to clinical psychology. When you ask thousands of people hundreds of questions (or ask them to rate themselves using descriptive adjectives such as kind,competitive, happy, anxious, creative, diligent, etc.) powerful statistics can identify patterns. People who describe themselves as kind tend not to consider themselves competitive, for example, but are likely to accept cooperative and caring. Likewise, creative types might regard themselves as curious and inventive, while the diligent types are also dutiful and orderly.Once a relatively standard model had been agreed upon, and been deemed reliable and valid, then differences, such as those between the sexes, could be investigated. What emerged? First, men and women are more similar than they are different. Even when men and women are most differentin those cultures where they differ most, and along those trait dimensions where they differ mostthey are more similar than different. However, the differences that do existare large enough so that they play an important role in determining or at least affecting important life outcomes, such as occupational choice.Where are the largest differences? Men are less agreeable (more competitive, harsher, tough-minded, skeptical, unsympathetic, critically-minded, independent, stubborn). This is in keeping with their proclivity, also documented cross-culturally, to manifest higher rates of violence and antisocial or criminal behavior, such that incarceration rates for men vs women approximate :. Women are higher in negative emotion, or neuroticism. They experience more anxiety, emotional pain, frustration, grief, self-conscious doubt and disappointment. This seems to emerge at puberty.There are other sex differences as well, but they arent as large, excepting that of interest: men are comparatively more interested in things and women in people. This is the largest psychological difference between men and women yet identified. And these differences drive occupational choice, particularly at the extremes. Engineers, for example, tend to be those who are not only interested in things, but who are more interested in things than most people, men or women.Its very important to remember that many choices are made at the extreme, and not the average. Its not the average more aggressive/less agreeable male thats in prison. In fact, if you draw a random man and a random woman from the population, and you bet that the woman is more aggressive/less agreeable, youd be correct about % of the time. But if you walked into a roomful of people everyone of whom had been selected to be the most aggressive person out of a almost every one of them would be male.So even though men and women are more the same than they are different, the differences can matter.What happens if you look at sex differences in personality and interest by country? Are the differences bigger in some countries and smaller in others? Would the differences between men and women be larger or smaller in wealthier countries? In more egalitarian countries? The answer: the more egalitarian and wealthier the country, the larger the differences between men and women in temperament and in interest. And the relationship is not small. The most recent study, published in Science (by researchers at Berkeley, hardly a hotbed of conservatism and patriarchy) showed a relationship between a wealth/egalitarian composite measure and sex differences that was larger than that reported in % of published social science studies. These are not small-scale studies. Tens of thousands of people have participated in them. And many different groups of scientists have come to the same conclusions, and published those results in very good journals.Given that differences in temperament and interest help determine occupational choice, and that differences in occupational choice drives variability in such things as income, this indicates that political doctrines that promote equality of opportunity also drive inequality of outcome.This is a big problemparticularly if the goal of such egalitarian policies was to minimize the differences between men and women. Its actually a fatal problem for a particular political view. The facts can be denied, but only at the cost of throwing out social science in its entirety and a good bit of biology as well. That is simply not a reasonable solution.The best explanation, so far, for the fact of the growing differences is that there are two reasons for the differences between men and women: biology and culture. If you minimize the cultural differences (as you do with egalitarian social policies) then you allow the biological differences to manifest themselves fully. I have seen social scientists struggle to offer a cultural explanation, but I havent heard any such hypothesis that is the least bit credible, and have been unable to formulate one myself.There are also those who insist that we just havent gone far enough in our egalitarian attemptsthat even Scandinavia and The Netherlands, arguably the worlds most egalitarian societies, are still rampantly patriarchalbut that doesnt explain why the sex differences have grown, rather than shrunk, as those cultures have become demonstrably more equal in social policy.Those who adopt this viewpoint, despite its apparent logical impossibility, maintain that we mustredouble our efforts to socialize little boys and girls in exactly the same mannerrendering all toys gender-neutral, questioning even the idea of gender identity itselfand believe that such maneuvering will finally bring us to the ideal utopia, where every occupation and every strata of authority within every occupation is manned (so to speak) by % men and % women. Why should we launch large-scale experiments aimed at transforming the socialization of children when we have no idea what the outcome might be? And why should we presume that we know how to eliminate gender identity among young children? Finally, why exactly is it a problem if men and women, freed to make the choices they would make when confronted with egalitarian opportunities, happen to make different choices?So, this is the Scandinavian conundrum one that also affects the broader Western world (and the rest of the world, soon enough). Policies that maximize equality of opportunity make equality of outcome increasingly impossible. The doctrine, ever more radically and loudly insisted upon by the politically correct, that sex differences are only socially constructed is wrong. Get it? Wrong.Its no wonder that when I came bearing this news the Swedish Foreign Minister (a proud member of the worlds only self-proclaimed feminist government) suggested publicly that I crawl back under my rock, and that one of Swedens leading female politicians objected on prime time TV that her daughter could be raised to be anything she wants to be. But facts is facts, Im afraid, and no amount of neo-Marxist leftist postmodern suggestion that social science is a patriarchal construction is going to make the ugly truth disappear: Men and women are similar. But they are importantly different.The differences matter, particularly at the extremes, particularly with regard to occupational choice and its concomitants. There are going to be more male criminals, and more male engineers, and more females with diagnoses of depression and anxiety, and more female nurses. And there are going to be differences in economic outcome associated with this variance.Game over, utopians.And thats why the information I shared during my visit to Scandinavia caused a scandal that continues to reverberate.Part Two (Canada)Justin Trudeaus new cabinet awaits the new Prime Minister at Rideau Hall on Wednesday. Tony Caldwell/ Postmedia NetworkWe all remember that our current Prime Minister, the Right Honorable Justin Trudeau, decided early on when he formed his government to make his cabinet % women, because it was . He got a hall pass for this, no doubt because of his boyish charm and modern mien. But it was a mistake of unforgivable magnitude and here are some of the reasons why: The job of the federal government is important, necessary and difficult. To make important, difficult decisions properly, competence is necessary. There is no relationship between sex and competence. Men and women are essentially equal in their intelligence, and they differ very little in conscientiousness (which is the second-best predictor of success, after intelligence). Thus, selection for competence should optimally be sex-blind, if competence is the most important factor. The possibility of identifying a competent person increases as the pool of available candidates increases. Only % of the elected MPs in Trudeaus government were women. By selecting % of his cabinet from % of the pool of available candidates, Prime Minister Trudeau abdicated his responsibility to rank-order all of his elected officials by competence (which could have been done by blind, multi-person rating of their resumes, including education and accomplishments) and staffing his cabinet from the most qualified person downward.Given that only % of the elected MPs were women, the selection of half the cabinet from this pool means that it is a statistical certainty that the cabinet members chosen were not the most competent available.It might also be pointed out that such a move is particularly appalling given its source. Lets assume (which I dont) that there is patriarchy, and with it, generally undeserved privilege. Lets even assume (which I dont) that much of this is accrued unfairly by straight white men, as the identity politics players, such as our Prime Minister, self-righteously and vociferously insist.Is it truly unreasonable to point out that the absolute poster boy for such privilege is none other than our Prime Minister, Justin Trudeaua man who dared run for the highest office in the land despite his utter lack of credentials (other than good looks, charm and a certain ability to behave properly in public) merely because his father, Pierre, turned the Trudeau name into the very epitome of status unearned by his sons?Is it also unreasonable to point out that the women who accepted those positions, granted to them unfairly, in a prejudiced and discriminatory manner, took that as their due, despite the unlikelihood, statistically, of their suitability for the positions in question, and thus betrayed themselves, men and women everywhere striving fairly for advancement, and their country? All in the name of redress for some hypothetical prejudice, a consequence of the patriarchal tyranny, experienced in large measure by vaguely apprehended women of the past and definitely other than themselves.Appalling. All of it. Appalling.
