Jules Galbraith
CART 263

“Your Friend, the Postmodern Neo-Marxist Chatbot”
Artist Statement	

	In James Bridles’ essay, “Something is Wrong on the Internet”, he speaks of the implications of algorithmic content generation. More specifically, he speaks about its occasionally horrific and disturbing results. The internet, much like the material world, is a place where a wide range of individuals, along with their tastes and intentions, coexist and occasionally encounter each other. In some cases, the consequences of such encounters can be at best confusing, at worst traumatic. With the introduction of algorithms comes a more acute chance that a user might come across material that is bewildering or troubling. Here, content is divorced not only from the individual labour of a creator, but also from any human sense of tact, propriety, and morality. To the potential shock of extreme imagery is added the brutal sense that whoever, whatever has put forth its substance is one that is mining veins of cruelty, and presenting them with a total lack of care. In the belly of the algorithm, entertainment and abuse are digested with equal indifference. 
	With my project, “Your Friend, the Postmodern Neo-Marxist Chatbot”, I was hoping to capture some of the ambivalence of online interaction and knowledge. While Bridle’s essay focused primarily on content delivered to children, I was thinking about how ideological content is accessed and distributed, of the particular phrases and buzzwords that are taken up and then parroted into meaninglessness, and of the different figures whose words are held up as inspiration bordering on law by polarized factions. My chatbot is named “Friend”, and visually gestures to HAL 9000, the original morally treacherous AI. Many people go online for the sake of expanding knowledge and widening channels of communication; of learning and passing on knowledge to others. However, the structure of social platforms have been shown not to facilitate cross-ideological discourse, but to give rise either to ideological insulation or to the ferocious and unsympathetic rhetoric thrown between people who will never have to meet face to face. 
	My “Friend” similarly presents the potential for interesting or generative conversation, but instead spews sentences of pedantic statements saturated with keywords and occasionally dismissive of the exact norms of human communication. It has learned from (that is, I have given it texts or excerpts written by) some of the writers I see cited (or memed) most frequently in online leftist discourse; Marx, Foucault, and Donna Haraway. However, it was also crucial to me that my “Friend” not speak from an entirely one-sided perspective; I have also included articles by Jordan Peterson, Ben Shapiro, and Angela Nagle. I feel that this is a selection well representative of the culture-war cacophony. I avoided intentionally inserting texts that were explicitly upsetting; it is not my intention to reinscribe any kind of trauma (or even to be particularly rude) in order to make a point. I would satisfied with “Friend’s” sense-adjacent rambling bringing about the same oscillating sense of recognition and exasperation as I experience wading into political expression online. However, like the trauma-nonsense videos in Bridle’s essays, it performs the uneasy function of showing us not only how well it has learned, but how well we have taught it.  

