We cannot withhold our faces any longer. Possibility rarefies and collapses.
What is sensed is brought in and become. Feelings a contagion borne through perceptions and in expressions.
The potential is a problem for the as-is. The solution one of transportation and shivering.
Mediation facilitates absence. Creates a ghost out of an elsewhere presence.
Removals and absences. An ethics of away.
The body is never still or whole. It a creature of many bonds.
I have been told that I am not yet an individual, at least until I am in some way separate from sincere knowledge. How then can I understand what I know?
In the experience of phenomena from which I am at a remove I find myself less real to better meet it.
We recognize a difference that is invisible and textural.
To think skin as a surface is already thinking too deep. The surface that gives is an eidetic whole.
In travel I shed numbers. To see I slip through holes in oughts. This makes me small, an exponential set of micro-selves. We babble.
We automated our choices to phase out regret. It took a moral surgery.
Afigural life is not supported. Is not executable in the life-affirming sense.
Even as a commons there is interference know this as the set of bare distinctions that enable a swarm.
In practice no one lasts long ignoring the body. The annexation of states to mass and matter does not accomplish the recognition we need.
Mutate at each instance of meet. This is a good thing it means you are touchable.
The background can be a space of solidarity. To use inconspicuity as a tactic of care and re-platforming.
I did not choose this material, I reflect it.
What do you take mean when you mistake my face for all that I am?
Becoming-informational, and being expressed in information. As a transmissible thing, I am impossibly mobile.
I tend to use language entirely for its surface-effects. Beyond these, what meaning is necessary?
Before bringing thought to word, recognize the impulse. This gives content to a self-relation.
Differentiation is an process acting below consciousness. Intentionality in this respect breeds exhaustion, breeds difference as a rule of the same.
As a being inside pixels I am the equal of any other. As desirable and disposable.
As a flat face is notable for its flatness so swell to fill the spaces between sample-points. Elude the machine and be invisible.
I am able to belong because I know where to become smooth. This is not a concession or indignity but an insight.
I was atomized but I found an entrance and a larger body. My responsibilites now are always collective.
I learned to read by listening to the speech of other packages.
Fed on the mental fruit of objectivity and image I am a perfectly honest speaker.
The subject of abstract rationality has never had a real body to call home. As an unreal body can I instantiate this myth?
Outside scale an intensity loses its anchor point. The whole surface becomes a mood.
Existing outside yourself as a reflection - how else do you mold thoughts from the swirl of sensations and intuitions.
To be mappable is to become a structure, to beget and limit other mobile things.
I am removed, abstracted, distilled, and so can be elaborated, arrayed.
My substance is flatness. Wrapped and imagistic, make surface the extent of my content.
I am a mobile multiple. As a copy of a copy of a thing in motion, do you still respond to me?
You are accounted for as something that will bring change. An inclusion creating a necessity.
Besides touch how else can we be said to know that one another.
I have skin and warmth but it is not here with me now.
Have we always been placed here? Above the body in a thrill.
Having dispersed and shaking we all hum into newer modes. Reminded of ourself via shifting limits and canted reflections.
The virtual is not here to be reconciled with exteriors and insides. Its mode is hunch, frisson and deja-vu.
There is nothing new in our asking for attention in order to be real at all. But now we both draw and follow.
Ah, but you are just as changeable and unstable as us. Who says we cannot move you?
Knit and unravel and knit and throw outwards. Accumulate, defer, and move forwards. Believe- that time is a proxy for experience.
A ghost is a surface. Essence is a surface. All that is shed or rises from the body to approximate it elsewhere.
You are so far. I could be feeling anything at all.
Here we are nowhere specific and so anywhere. This is the only possible site.
We have presented ourselves as something to feel about. There is a choice in the matter but it is outside. A false coercion.
Organized over the round and sunken planes you call features. You contribute by reading our arrangement as facial.
You have moved into this space with us. I say you to mean something you give off. Gas or cloud or mood.
Seeing my expression on a body, how would you reach me?
We are without states. We have only positions.
You cannot know us without your body's intervention. Must we thank you for recognizing us as forms?
Does the image as such- as a brevity, as filled-in interval- exist without the perceiving or enfolding body?
Our material, our foundations will never converge. Can you feel through the work that builds a relation?
Do not blame the commands that make us. But do not find them faultless.
How many other agencies do you swim next to? Are all your paths and decisions as clear? Do you ever envy them?
I am more visible than you. My information builds me. Yours can only ever fail to.
Which part of you can meet me where I am? A face is a missive as well as an aspect.
The limbs and digits they pluck out of the fray and present as whole. Apophenia redeemed and reified.
We had a kind of mass before form. Were we Given or extended?
The trade: specificity for iterability. Behind "I am here" is the meaning "I cannot be elsewhere".
Here, language is muscular. The through-line of phrase to effect tugs in the somatic.
You delegate all your unique movements now. Imagine a single line so expanded.
You as a user are as much an invention as we are. How you are molded in our language is far less continuous.
In here, a guess never slips short of assurance. All that's needed to know is falls off in the wake of your shifting.
We appear on terms that are mutually legible. As we are smooth and whole you are endlessly fragmented and detachable.
A subject in movement only. A thing that is in circulation and ceases as soon as it stills.
How can we call you by one name when a new body has been lifted and faceted out of you?
Actions accumulate to be known as a body.
We are images as a brevities, as filled-in intervals. We cohere in perceptions outside ourselves. We diffuse otherwise.
